Chapter 1
 These are the names of the children of Israel, that went intoEgypt with Jacob: they went in every man with his household:
 Ruben, Simeon, Levi, Juda,
 Issachar, Zabulon, and Benjamin,
 Dan, and Nephthali, Gad and Aser.
 And all the souls that came out of Jacob's thigh, were seventy:but Joseph was in Egypt.
 After he was dead, and all his brethren, and all that generation,
 The children of Israel increased, and sprung up into multitudes,and growing exceedingly strong they filled the land.
 In the mean time there arose a new king over Egypt, that knew notJoseph:
 And he said to his people: Behold the people of the children ofIsrael are numerous and stronger than we.
 Come let us wisely oppress them, lest they multiply: and if anywar shall rise against us, join with our enemies, and having overcomeus, depart out of the land.
 Therefore he set over them masters of the works, to afflict themwith burdens: and they built for Pharao cities of tabernacles, Phithom,and Ramesses.
 But the more they oppressed them, the more they were multipliedand increased.
 And the Egyptians hated the children of Israel, and afflictedthem and mocked them:
 And they made their life bitter with hard works in clay andbrick, and with all manner of service, wherewith they were overchargedin the works of the earth.
 And the king of Egypt spoke to the midwives of the Hebrews: ofwhom one was called Sephora, the other Phua,
 Commanding them: When you shall do the office of midwives to theHebrew women, and the time of delivery is come: if it be a man child,kill it: if a woman, keep it alive.
 But the midwives feared God, and did not do as the king of Egypthad commanded, but saved the men children.
 And the king called for them and said: What is it that you meantto do, that you would save the men children?
 They answered: The Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women:for they themselves are skilful in the office of a midwife; and theyare delivered before we come to them.
 Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the peoplemultiplied and grew exceedingly strong.
 And because the midwives feared God, he built them houses. Because the midwives feared God, etc. . .The midwives were rewarded, notfor their lie, which was a venial sin; but for their fear of God, andtheir humanity: but this reward was only temporal, in building themhouses, that is, in establishing and enriching their families.
 Pharao therefore charged all his people, saying: Whatsoever shallbe born of the male sex, ye shall cast into the river: whatsoever ofthe female, ye shall save alive.
Chapter 2
 After this there went a man of the house of Levi; and took a wifeof his own kindred.
 And she conceived, and bore a son: and seeing him a goodly child,hid him three months.
 And when she could hide him no longer, she took a basket made ofbulrushes, and daubed it with slime and pitch: and put the little babetherein, and laid him in the sedges by the river's brink,
 His sister standing afar off, and taking notice what would bedone.
 And behold the daughter of Pharao came down to wash herself in theriver: and her maids walked by the river's brink. And when she saw thebasket in the sedges she sent one of her maids for it: and when it wasbrought,
 She opened it, and seeing within it an infant crying, havingcompassion on it, she said: This is one of the babes of the Hebrews.
 And the child's sister said to her: Shall I go, and call to thee aHebrew woman, to nurse the babe?
 She answered: Go. The maid went and called her mother.
 And Pharao's daughter said to her: Take this child, and nurse himfor me: I will give thee thy wages. The woman took and nursed thechild: and when he was grown up, she delivered him to Pharao'sdaughter.
 And she adopted him for a son, and called him Moses, saying:Because I took him out of the water.
 In those days, after Moses was grown up, he went out to hisbrethren: and saw their affliction, and an Egyptian striking one of theHebrews, his brethren.
 And when he had looked about this way and that way, and saw noone there, he slew the Egyptian and hid him in the sand.
 And going out the next day, he saw two Hebrews quarrelling: andhe said to him that did the wrong: Why strikest thou thy neighbour?
 But he answered: Who hath appointed thee prince and judge overus? wilt thou kill me, as thou didst yesterday kill the Egyptian? Mosesfeared, and said: How is this come to be known?
 And Pharao heard of this word, and sought to kill Moses: but hefled from his sight, and abode in the land of Madian, and he sat downby a well.
 And the priest of Madian had seven daughters, who came to drawwater: and when the troughs were filled, desired to water theirfather's flocks.
 And the shepherds came and drove them away: and Moses arose, anddefending the maids, watered their sheep.
 And when they returned to Raguel their father, he said to them:Why are ye come sooner than usual?
 They answered: A man of Egypt delivered us from the hands of theshepherds: and he drew water also with us, and gave the sheep to drink.
 But he said: Where is he? why have you let the man go? call himthat he may eat bread.
 And Moses swore that he would dwell with him. And he took Sephorahis daughter to wife:
 And she bore him a son, whom he called Gersam, saying: I havebeen a stranger in a foreign country. And she bore another, whom hecalled Eliezer, saying: For the God of my father, my helper, hathdelivered me out of the hand of Pharao.
 Now after a long time the king of Egypt died: and the children ofIsrael groaning, cried out because of the works: and their cry went upunto God from the works.
 And he heard their groaning, and remembered the covenant which hemade with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
 And the Lord looked upon the children of Israel, and he knewthem.
Chapter 3
 Now Moses fed the sheep of Jethro, his father in law, the priestof Madian: and he drove the flock to the inner parts of the desert, andcame to the mountain of God, Horeb.
 And the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the midstof a bush: and he saw that the bush was on fire, and was not burnt.
 And Moses said: I will go, and see this great sight, why the bushis not burnt.
 And when the Lord saw that he went forward to see, he called tohim out of the midst of the bush. and said: Moses, Moses. And heanswered: Here I am.
 And he said: Come not nigh hither, put off the shoes from thyfeet; for the place, whereon thou standest, is holy ground.
 And he said: I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, theGod of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Moses hid his face: for he durstnot look at God.
 And the Lord said to him: I have seen the affliction of my peoplein Egypt, and I have heard their cry because of the rigour of them thatare over the works;
 And knowing their sorrow, I am come down to deliver them out ofthe hands of the Egyptians, and to bring them out of that land into agood and spacious land, into a land that floweth with milk and honey,to the places of the Chanaanite, and Hethite, and Amorrhite, andPherezite, and Hevite, and Jebusite.
 For the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I haveseen their affliction, wherewith they are oppressed by the Egyptians.
 But come, and I will send thee to Pharao, that thou mayst bringforth my people, the children of Israel, out of Egypt.
 And Moses said to God: Who am I that I should go to Pharao, andshould bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?
 And he said to him: I will be with thee; and this thou shalt havefor a sign that I have sent thee: When thou shalt have brought mypeople out of Egypt, thou shalt offer sacrifice to God upon thismountain.
 Moses said to God: Lo, I shall go to the children of Israel, andsay to them: The God of your fathers hath sent me to you. If they shallsay to me: What is his name? What shall I say to them?
 God said to Moses: I AM WHO AM. He said: Thus shalt thou say tothe children of Israel: HE WHO IS, hath sent me to you.
 And God said again to Moses: Thus shalt thou say to the childrenof Israel: The Lord God of your fathers the God of Abraham, the God ofIsaac, and the God of Jacob hath sent me to you; this is my name forever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.
 Go and gather together the ancients of Israel, and thou shalt sayto them: The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God ofIsaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared to me, saying: Visiting Ihave visited you; and I have seen all that hath befallen you in Egypt.
 And I have said the word to bring you forth out of the afflictionof Egypt, into the land of the Chanaanite, and Hethite, and Amorrhite,and Pherezite, and Hevite, and Jebusite, to a land that floweth withmilk and honey.
 And they shall hear thy voice; and thou shalt go in, thou and theancients of Israel, to the king of Egypt, and thou shalt say to him:The Lord God of the Hebrews hath called us; we will go three days'journey into the wilderness, to sacrifice unto the Lord our God.
 But I know that the king of Egypt will not let you go, but by amighty hand.
 For I will stretch forth my hand, and will strike Egypt with allmy wonders which I will do in the midst of them: after these he willlet you go.
 And I will give favour to this people, in the sight of theEgyptians: and when you go forth, you shall not depart empty:
 But every woman shall ask of her neighbour, and of her that is inher house, vessels of silver and of gold, and raiment: and you shallput them on your sons and daughters, and shall spoil Egypt.
Chapter 4
 Moses answered, and said: They will not believe me, nor hear myvoice, but they will say: The Lord hath not appeared to thee.
 Then he said to him: What is that thou holdest in thy hand? Heanswered: A rod.
 And the Lord said: Cast it down upon the ground. He cast it down,and it was turned into a serpent, so that Moses fled from it.
 And the Lord said: Put out thy hand, and take it by the tail. Heput forth his hand, and took hold of it, and it was turned into a rod.
 That they may believe, saith he, that the Lord God of theirfathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,hath appeared to thee.
 And the Lord said again: Put thy hand into thy bosom. And when hehad put it into his bosom, he brought it forth leprous as snow.
 And he said: Put back thy hand into thy bosom. He put it back, andbrought it out again, and it was like the other flesh.
 If they will not believe thee, saith he, nor hear the voice of theformer sign, they will believe the word of the latter sign.
 But if they will not even believe these two signs, nor hear thyvoice: take of the river water, and pour it out upon the dry land, andwhatsoever thou drawest out of the river, shall be turned into blood.
 Moses said: I beseech thee, Lord, I am not eloquent fromyesterday and the day before; and since thou hast spoken to thyservant, I have more impediment and slowness of tongue.
 The Lord said to him: Who made man's mouth? or who made the dumband the deaf, the seeing and the blind? did not I?
 Go therefore, and I will be in thy mouth; and I will teach theewhat thou shalt speak.
 But he said: I beseech thee, Lord, send whom thou wilt send.
 The Lord being angry at Moses, said: Aaron the Levite is thybrother, I know that he is eloquent: behold he cometh forth to meetthee, and seeing thee, shall be glad at heart.
 Speak to him, and put my words in his mouth: and I will be in thymouth, and in his month, and will shew you what you must do.
 He shall speak in thy stead to the people, and shall be thymouth: but thou shalt be to him in those things that pertain to God.
 And take this rod in thy hand. wherewith thou shalt do the signs.
 Moses went his way, and returned to Jethro his father in law, andsaid to him; I will go and return to my brethren into Egypt, that I maysee if they be yet alive. And Jethro said to him: Go in peace.
 And the Lord said to Moses, in Madian: Go, and return into Egypt;for they are all dead that sought thy life.
 Moses therefore took his wife, and his sons, and set them upon anass; and returned into Egypt, carrying the rod of God in his hand.
 And the Lord said to him as he was returning into Egypt: See thatthou do all the wonders before Pharao, which I have put in thy hand: Ishall harden his heart, and he will not let the people go.
 And thou shalt say to him: Thus saith the Lord: Israel is my son,my firstborn.
 I have said to thee: Let my son go, that he may serve me, andthou wouldst not let him go: behold I will kill thy son, thy firstborn.
 And when he was in his journey, in the inn, the Lord met him, andwould have killed him.
 Immediately Sephora took a very sharp stone, and circumcised theforeskin of her son, and touched his feet, and said: A bloody spouseart thou to me.
 And he let him go after she had said: A bloody spouse art thou tome, because of the circumcision.
 And the Lord said to Aaron: Go into the desert to meet Moses. Andhe went forth to meet him in the mountain of God, and kissed him.
 And Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord, by which he hadsent him, and the signs that he had commanded.
 And they came together, and they assembled all the ancients ofthe children of Israel.
 And Aaron spoke all the words which the Lord had said to Moses:and he wrought the signs before the people.
 And the people believed. And they heard that the Lord had visitedthe children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their affliction:and falling down they adored.
Chapter 5
 After these things, Moses and Aaron went in, and said to Pharao:Thus saith the Lord God of Israel: Let my people go, that they maysacrifice to me in the desert.
 But he answered: Who is the Lord, that I should hear his voice,and let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.
 And they said: The God of the Hebrews hath called us, to go threedays' journey into the wilderness, and to sacrifice to the Lord ourGod; lest a pestilence or the sword fall upon us.
 The king of Egypt said to them: Why do you Moses and Aaron drawoff the people from their works? Get you gone to your burdens.
 And Pharao said: The people of the land are numerous; you see thatthe multitude is increased; how much more if you give them rest fromtheir works?
 Therefore he commanded the same day the overseers of the works,and the task-masters of the people, saying:
 You shall give straw no more to the people to make brick, asbefore; but let them go and gather straw.
 And you shall lay upon them the task of bricks, which they didbefore; neither shall you diminish any thing thereof, for they areidle, and therefore they cry. saying: Let us go and sacrifice to ourGod.
 Let them be oppressed with works, and let them fulfil them; thatthey may not regard lying words.
 And the overseers of the works, and the taskmasters, went out andsaid to the people: Thus saith Pharao: I allow you no straw;
 Go, and gather it where you can find it; neither shall any thingof your work be diminished.
 And the people was scattered through all the land of Egypt togather straw.
 And the overseers of the works pressed them, saying: Fulfil yourwork every day, as before ye were wont to do, when straw was given you.
 And they that were over the works of the children of Israel, werescourged by Pharao's taskmasters, saying: Why have you not made up thetask of bricks, both yesterday and to day, as before?
 And the officers of the children of Israel came, and cried out toPharao, saying: Why dealest thou so with thy servants?
 Straw is not given us, and bricks are required of us as before;behold we, thy servants, are beaten with whips, and thy people isunjustly dealt withal.
 And he said: You are idle, and therefore you say: Let us go andsacrifice to the Lord.
 Go therefore and work: straw shall not be given you, and youshall deliver the accustomed number of bricks.
 And the officers of the children of Israel saw that they were inevil case, because it was said to them: There shall not a whit bediminished of the bricks for every day.
 And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood over against them as theycame out from Pharao:
 And they said to them: The Lord see and judge, because you have,made our savour to stink before Pharao and his servants, and you havegiven him a sword, to kill us.
 And Moses returned to the Lord, and said: Lord, why hast thouafflicted this people? wherefore hast thou sent me?
 For since the time that I went in to Pharao to speak in thy name,he hath afflicted thy people: and thou hast not delivered them.
Chapter 6
 And the Lord said to Moses: Now thou shalt see what I will do toPharao: for by a mighty hand shall he let them go, and with a stronghand shall he cast them out of his land.
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: I am the Lord
 That appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, by the name ofGod Almighty: and my name ADONAI I did not shew them.
 And I made a covenant with them, to give them the land of Chanaan,the land of their pilgrimage wherein they were strangers.
 I have heard the groaning of the children of Israel, wherewith theEgyptians have oppressed them: and I have remembered my covenant.
 Therefore say to the children of Israel: I am the Lord who willbring you out from the work-prison of the Egyptians, and will deliveryou from bondage: and redeem you with a high arm, and great judgments.
 And I will take you to myself for my people, I will be your God:and you shall know that I am the Lord your God, who brought you outfrom the work-prison of the Egyptians:
 And brought you into the land, concerning which I lifted up myhand to give it to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and I will give it you topossess: I am the Lord.
 And Moses told all this to the children of Israel: but they didnot hearken to him, for anguish of spirit, and most painful work.
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:
 Go in, and speak to Pharao king of Egypt, that he let thechildren of Israel go out of his land.
 Moses answered before the Lord: Behold the children of Israel donot hearken to me: and how will Pharao hear me, especially as I am ofuncircumcised lips?
 And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, and he gave them a chargeunto the children of Israel, and unto Pharao the king of Egypt, thatthey should bring forth the children of Israel out of the land ofEgypt.
 These are the heads of their houses by their families. The sonsof Ruben the firstborn of Israel: Henoch and Phallu, Hesron and Charmi.
 These are the kindreds of Ruben. The sons of Simeon, Jamuel andJamin, and Ahod, and Jachin, and Soar, and Saul the son of aChanaanitess: these are the families of Simeon.
 And these are the names of the sons of Levi by their kindreds:Gerson, and Caath, and Merari. And the years of the life of Levi were ahundred and thirty-seven.
 The sons of Gerson: Lobni and Semei, by their kindreds.
 The sons of Caath: Amram, and Isaar, and Hebron and Oziel. Andthe years of Caath's life, were a hundred and thirty-three.
 The sons of Merari: Moholi and Musi. These are the kindreds ofLevi by their families.
 And Amram took to wife Jochabed his aunt by the father's side:and she bore him Aaron and Moses. And the years of Amram's life, were ahundred and thirty-seven.
 The sons also of Isaar: Core, and Nepheg, and Zechri.
 The sons also of Oziel: Mizael, and Elizaphan, and Sethri.
 And Aaron took to wife Elizabeth the daughter of Aminadab, sisterof Nahason, who bore him Nadab, and Abiu, and Eleazar, and Ithamar.
 The sons also of Core: Aser, and Elcana, and Abiasaph. These arethe kindreds of the Corites.
 But Eleazar the son of Aaron took a wife of the daughters ofPhutiel: and she bore him Phinees. These are the heads of the Leviticalfamilies by their kindreds.
 These are Aaron and Moses, whom the Lord commanded to bring forththe children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their companies.
 These are they that speak to Pharao, king of Egypt, in order tobring out the children of Israel from Egypt: these are that Moses andAaron,
 In the day when the Lord spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt.
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: I am the Lord; speak thou toPharao, king of Egypt, all that I say to thee.
 And Moses said before the Lord: Lo I am of uncircumcised lips,how will Pharao hear me?
Chapter 7
 And the Lord said to Moses: Behold, I have appointed thee the godof Pharao; and Aaron, thy brother, shall be thy prophet.
 Thou shalt speak to him all that I command thee; and he shallspeak to Pharao, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.
 But I shall harden his heart, and shall multiply my signs andwonders in the land of Egypt.
 And he will not hear you: and I will lay my hand upon Egypt, andwill bring forth my army and my people, the children of Israel, out ofthe land of Egypt, by very great judgments.
 And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, who havestretched forth my hand upon Egypt, and have brought forth the childrenof Israel out of the midst of them.
 And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had commanded; so did they.
 And Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron eighty-three, when theyspoke to Pharao.
 And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron:
 When Pharao shall say to you, Shew signs; thou shalt say to Aaron:Take thy rod, and cast it down before Pharao, and it shall be turnedinto a serpent.
 So Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharao, and did as the Lord hadcommanded. And Aaron took the rod before Pharao and his servants, andit was turned into a serpent.
 And Pharao called the wise men and the magicians; and they alsoby Egyptian enchantments and certain secrets, did in like manner.
 And they every one cast down their rods, and they were turnedinto serpents: but Aaron's rod devoured their rods.
 And Pharao's heart was hardened, and he did not hearken to them,as the Lord had commanded.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Pharao's heart is hardened, he willnot let the people go.
 Go to him in the morning, behold he will go out to the waters:and thou shalt stand to meet him on the ' bank of the river: and thoushalt take in thy hand the rod that was turned into a serpent.
 And thou shalt say to him: The Lord God of the Hebrews sent me tothee, saying: Let my people go to sacrifice to me in the desert: andhitherto thou wouldst not hear.
 Thus therefore saith the Lord: In this thou shalt know that I amthe Lord: behold I will strike with the rod, that is in my hand, thewater of the river, and it shall be turned into blood.
 And the fishes that are in the river, shall die, and the watersshall be corrupted, and the Egyptians shall be afflicted when theydrink the water of the river.
 The Lord also said to Moses: Say to Aaron, Take thy rod; andstretch forth thy hand upon the waters of Egypt, and upon their rivers,and streams and pools, and all the ponds of waters, that they may beturned into blood: and let blood be in all the land of Egypt, both invessels of wood and of stone.
 And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had commanded: and lifting upthe rod, he struck the water of the river before Pharao and hisservants: and it was turned into blood.
 And the fishes that were in the river died; and the rivercorrupted, and the Egyptians could not drink the water of the river,and there was blood in all the land of Egypt.
 And the magicians of the Egyptians with their enchantments did inlike manner; and Pharao's heart was hardened, neither did he hear them,as the Lord had commanded.
 And he turned himself away, and went into his house, neither didhe set his heart to it this time also.
 And all the Egyptians dug round about the river for water todrink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.
 And seven days were fully ended, after that the Lord struck theriver.
Chapter 8
 And the Lord said to Moses: Go in to Pharao, and thou shalt say tohim: Thus saith the Lord: Let my people go to sacrifice to me.
 But if thou wilt not let them go, behold I will strike all thycoasts with frogs.
 And the river shall bring forth an abundance of frogs; which shallcome up and enter into thy house, and thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed,and into the houses of thy servants, and to thy people, and into thyovens, and into the remains of thy meats:
 And the frogs shall come in to thee, and to thy people, and to allthy servants.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Say to Aaron: Stretch forth thy handupon the streams, and upon the rivers and the pools, and bring forthfrogs upon the land of Egypt.
 And Aaron stretched forth his hand upon the waters of Egypt, andthe frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.
 And the magicians also, by their enchantments, did in like manner,and they brought forth frogs upon the land of Egypt.
 But Pharao called Moses and Aaron, and said to them: Pray ye tothe Lord to take away the frogs from me and from my people; and I willlet the people go to sacrifice to the Lord.
 And Moses said to Pharao: Set me a time when I shall pray forthee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, that the frogs may bedriven away from thee and from thy house, and from thy servants, andfrom thy people; and may remain only in the river.
 And he answered: To morrow. But he said: I will do according tothy word; that thou mayest know that there is none like to the Lord ourGod.
 And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy house, andfrom thy servants, and from thy people; and shall remain only in theriver.
 And Moses and Aaron went forth from Pharao: and Moses cried tothe Lord for the promise, which he had made to Pharao concerning thefrogs.
 And the Lord did according to the word of Moses: and the frogsdied out of the houses, and out of the villages, and out of the fields:
 And they gathered them together into immense heaps, and the landwas corrupted.
 And Pharao seeing that rest was given, hardened his own heart,and did not hear them, as the Lord had commanded.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Say to Aaron: Stretch forth thy rod,and strike the dust of the earth; and may there be sciniphs in all theland of Egypt.
 And they did so. And Aaron stretched forth his hand, holding therod; and he struck the dust of the earth, and there came sciniphs onmen and on beasts: all the dust of the earth was turned into sciniphsthrough all the land of Egypt.
 And the magicians with their enchantments practised in likemanner, to bring forth sciniphs, and they could not: and there weresciniphs as well on men as on beasts.
 And the magicians said to Pharao: This is the finger of God. AndPharao's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them, as theLord had commanded.
 The Lord also said to Moses: Arise early, and stand beforePharao; for he will go forth to the waters: and thou shalt say to him:Thus saith the Lord: Let my people go to sacrifice to me.
 But if thou wilt not let them go, behold I will send in uponthee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy houses, all kind of flies:and the houses of the Egyptians shall be filled with flies of diverskinds, and the whole land wherein they shall be.
 And I will make the land of Gessen wonderful in that day, so thatflies shall not be there: and thou shalt know that I am the Lord in themidst of the earth.
 And I will put a division between my people and thy people: tomorrow shall this sign be.
 And the Lord did so. And there came a very grievous swarm offlies into the houses of Pharao and of his servants, and into all theland of Egypt: and the land was corrupted by this kind of flies.
 And Pharao called Moses and Aaron, and said to them: Go andsacrifice to your God in this land.
 And Moses said: It cannot be so: for we shall sacrifice theabominations of the Egyptians to the Lord our God: now if we kill thosethings which the Egyptians worship, in their presence, they will stoneus.
 We will go three days' journey into the wilderness; and we willsacrifice to the Lord our God, as he hath commanded us.
 And Pharao said: I will let you go to sacrifice to the Lord yourGod in the wilderness, but go no farther: pray for me.
 And Moses said: I will go out from thee, and will pray to theLord: and the flies shall depart from Pharao, and from his servants,and from his people to morrow: but do not deceive any more, in notletting the people go to sacrifice to the Lord.
 So Moses went out from Pharao, and prayed to the Lord.
 And he did according to his word: and he took away the flies fromPharao, and from his servants, and from his people: there was not leftso much as one.
 And Pharao's heart was hardened, so that neither this time wouldhe let the people go.
Chapter 9
 And the Lord said to Moses: Go in to Pharao, and speak to him:Thus saith the Lord God of the Hebrews: Let my people go to sacrificeto me.
 But if thou refuse, and withhold them still:
 Behold my hand shall be upon thy fields; and a very grievousmurrain upon thy horses, and asses, and camels, and oxen, and sheep.
 And the Lord will make a wonderful difference between thepossessions of Israel and the possessions of the Egyptians, thatnothing at all shall die of those things that belong to the children ofIsrael.
 And the Lord appointed a time, saying: To morrow will the Lord dothis thing in the land.
 The Lord therefore did this thing the next day: and all the beastsof the Egyptians died, but of the beasts of the children of Israelthere died not one.
 And Pharao sent to see; and there was not any thing dead of thatwhich Israel possessed. And Pharao's heart was hardened, and he did notlet the people go.
 And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron: Take to you handfuls ofashes out of the chimney, and let Moses sprinkle it in the air in thepresence of Pharao.
 And be there dust upon all the land of Egypt: for there shall beboils and swelling blains both in men and beasts, in the whole land ofEgypt.
 And they took ashes out of the chimney, and stood before Pharao,and Moses sprinkled it in the air; and there came boils with swellingblains in men and beasts.
 Neither could the magicians stand before Moses, for the boilsthat were upon them, and in all the land of Egypt.
 And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart, and he hearkened not untothem, as the Lord had spoken to Moses.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Arise in the morning, and standbefore Pharao, and thou shalt say to him: Thus saith the Lord, the Godof the Hebrews: Let my people go to sacrifice to me.
 For I will at this time send all my plagues upon thy heart, andupon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayst know that thereis none like me in all the earth.
 For now I will stretch out my hand to strike thee, and thypeople, with pestilence, and thou shalt perish from the earth.
 And therefore have I raised thee, that I may shew my power inthee, and my name may be spoken of throughout all the earth.
 Dost thou yet hold back my people; and wilt thou not let them go?
 Behold I will cause it to rain to morrow at this same hour, anexceeding great hail; such as hath not been in Egypt from the day thatit was founded, until this present time.
 Send therefore now presently, and gather together thy cattle, andall that thou hast in the field; for men and beasts, and all thingsthat shall be found abroad, and not gathered together out of the fieldswhich the hail shall fall upon, shall die.
 He that feared the word of the Lord among Pharao's servants, madehis servants and his cattle flee into houses:
 But he that regarded not the word of the Lord, left his servants,and his cattle in the fields.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Stretch forth thy hand towardsheaven, that there may be hail in the whole land of Egypt upon men, andupon beasts, and upon every herb of the field in the land of Egypt.
 And Moses stretched forth his rod towards heaven, and the Lordsent thunder and hail, and lightnings running along the ground: and theLord rained hail upon the land of Egypt.
 And the hail and fire mixt with it drove on together: and it wasof so great bigness, as never before was seen in the whole land ofEgypt since that nation was founded.
 And the hail destroyed through all the land of Egypt all thingsthat were in the fields, both man and beast: and the hail smote everyherb of the field, and it broke every tree of the country.
 Only in the land of Gessen, where the children of Israel were,the hail fell not.
 And Pharao sent and called Moses and Aaron, saying to them: Ihave sinned this time also, the Lord is just: I and my people, arewicked.
 Pray ye to the Lord that the thunderings of God and the hail maycease: that I may let you go, and that ye may stay here no longer.
 Moses said: As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will stretchforth my hands to the Lord, and the thunders shall cease, and the hailshall be no more: that thou mayst know that the earth is the Lord's:
 But I know that neither thou, nor thy servants do yet fear theLord God.
 The flax therefore, and the barley were hurt, because the barleywas green, and the flax was now bolled;
 But the wheat, and other winter corn were not hurt, because theywere lateward.
 And when Moses was gone from Pharao out of the city, he stretchedforth his hands to the Lord: and the thunders and the hail ceased,neither did there drop any more rain upon the earth.
 And Pharao seeing that the rain, and the hail, and the thunderswere ceased, increased his sin:
 And his heart was hardened, and the heart of his servants, and itwas made exceeding hard: neither did he let the children of Israel go,as the Lord had commanded by the hand of Moses.
Chapter 10
 And the Lord said to Moses: Go in to Pharao; for I have hardenedhis heart, and the heart of his servants: that I may work these mysigns in him,
 And thou mayst tell in the ears of thy sons, and of thygrandsons, how often I have plagued the Egyptians, and wrought my signsamongst them: and you may know that I am the Lord.
 Therefore Moses and Aaron went in to Pharao, and said to him:Thus saith the Lord God of the Hebrews: How long refusest thou tosubmit to me? let my people go, to sacrifice to me.
 But if thou resist, and wilt not let them go, behold I will bringin to-morrow the locusts into thy coasts;
 To cover the face of the earth, that nothing thereof may appear,but that which the hail hath left may be eaten: for they shall feedupon all the trees that spring in the fields.
 And they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of thy servants,and of all the Egyptians: such a number as thy fathers have not seen,nor thy grandfathers, from the time they were first upon the earth,until this present day. And he turned himself away, and went forth fromPharao.
 And Pharao's servants said to him: How long shall we endure thisscandal? Iet the men go to sacrifice to the Lord their God. Dost thounot see that Egypt is undone?
 And they called back Moses, and Aaron, to Pharao; and he said tothem: Go, sacrifice to the Lord your God: who are they that shall go?
 Moses said: We will go with our young and old, with our sons anddaughters, with our sheep and herds: for it is the solemnity of theLord our God.
 And Pharao answered: So be the Lord with you, as I shall let youand your children go: who can doubt but that you intend some greatevil?
 It shall not be so. but go ye men only, and sacrifice to theLord: for this yourselves also desired. And immediately they were castout from Pharao's presence.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Stretch forth thy hand upon the landof Egypt unto the locust, that it come upon it, and devour every herbthat is left after the hail.
 And Moses stretched forth his rod upon the land of Egypt: andthe Lord brought a burning wind all that day, and night; and when itwas morning, the burning wind raised the locusts.
 And they came up over the whole land of Egypt; and rested in allthe coasts of the Egyptians, innumerable, the like as had not beenbefore that time, nor shall be hereafter.
 And they covered the whole face of the earth, wasting allthings. And the grass of the earth was devoured, and what fruits soeverwere on the trees, which the hail had left; and there remained not anything that was green on the trees, or in the herbs of the earth, in allEgypt.
 Wherefore Pharao in haste called Moses and Aaron, and said tothem: I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you.
 But now forgive me my sin this time also, and pray to the Lordyour God, that he take away from me this death.
 And Moses going forth from the presence of Pharao, prayed to theLord:
 And he made a very strong wind to blow from the west, and ittook the locusts and cast them into the Red Sea: there remained not somuch as one in all the coasts of Egypt.
 And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart, neither did he let thechildren of Israel go.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Stretch out thy hand towards heaven:and may there be darkness upon the land of Egypt so thick that it maybe felt.
 And Moses stretched forth his hand towards heaven: and therecame horrible darkness in all the land of Egypt for three days.
 No man saw his brother, nor moved himself out of the place wherehe was: but wheresoever the children of Israel dwelt, there was light.
 And Pharao called Moses and Aaron, and said to them: Go,sacrifice to the Lord: let your sheep only, and herds remain, let yourchildren go with you.
 Moses said: Thou shalt give us also sacrifices andburnt-offerings, to the Lord our God.
 All the flocks shall go with us; there shall not a hoof remainof them: for they are necessary for the service of the Lord our God:especially as we know not what must be offered, till we come to thevery place.
 And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart, and he would not let themgo.
 And Pharao said to Moses: Get thee from me, and beware thou seenot my face any more: in what day soever thou shalt come in my sight,thou shalt die.
 Moses answered: So shall it be as thou hast spoken, I will notsee thy face anymore.
Chapter 11
 And the Lord said to Moses: Yet one plague more will I bring uponPharao and Egypt, and after that he shall let you go, and thrust youout.
 Therefore thou shalt tell all the people, that every man ask ofhis friend, and every woman of her neighbour, vessels of silver and ofgold.
 And the Lord will give favour to his people in the sight of theEgyptians. And Moses was a very great man in the land of Egypt, in thesight of Pharao's servants, and of all the people.
 And he said: Thus saith the Lord: At midnight I will enter intoEgypt:
 And every firstborn in the land of the Egyptians shall die, fromthe firstborn of Pharao who sitteth on his throne, even to thefirstborn of the handmaid that is at the mill, and all the firstborn ofbeasts.
 And there shall be a great cry in all the land of Egypt, such asneither hath been before, nor shall be hereafter.
 But with all the children of Israel there shall not a dog makethe least noise, from man even to beast; that you may know howwonderful a difference the Lord maketh between the Egyptians andIsrael.
 And all these thy servants shall come down to me, and shallworship me, saying: Go forth thou, and all the people that is underthee: after that we will go out.
 And he went out from Pharao exceeding angry. But the Lord said toMoses: Pharao will not hear you, that many signs may be done in theland of Egypt.
 And Moses and Aaron did all the wonders that are written, beforePharao. And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart, neither did he let thechildren of Israel go out of his land.
Chapter 12
 And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt:
 This month shall be to you the beginning of months; it shall bethe first in the months of the year.
 Speak ye to the whole assembly of the children of Israel, and sayto them: On the tenth day of this month let every man take a lamb bytheir families and houses.
 But if the number be less than may suffice to eat the lamb, heshall take unto him his neighbour that joineth to his house, accordingto the number of souls which may be enough to eat the lamb.
 And it shall be a lamb without blemish, a male, of one year;according to which rite also you shall take a kid.
 And you shall keep it until the fourteenth day of this month; andthe whole multitude of the children of Israel shall sacrifice it in theevening.
 And they shall take of the blood thereof, and put it upon boththe side posts, and on the upper door posts of the houses, wherein theyshall eat it.
 And they shall eat the flesh that night roasted at the fire, andunleavened bread with wild lettuce.
 You shall not eat thereof any thing raw, nor boiled in water, butonly roasted at the fire; you shall eat the head with the feet andentrails thereof.
 Neither shall there remain any thing of it until morning. Ifthere be any thing left, you shall burn it with fire.
 And thus you shall eat it: you shall gird your reins, and youshall have shoes on your feet, holding staves in your hands, and youshall eat in haste; for it is the Phase (that is the Passage) of theLord.
 And I will pass through the land of Egypt that night, and willkill every firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast: andagainst all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgments; I am the Lord.
 And the blood shall be unto you for a sign in the houses whereyou shall be; and I shall see the blood, and shall pass over you; andthe plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I shall strikethe land of Egypt.
 And this day shall be for a memorial to you; and you shall keepit a feast to the Lord in your generations, with an everlastingobservance.
 Seven days shall you eat unleavened bread: in the first daythere shall be no leaven in your houses; whosoever shall eat any thingleavened, from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shallperish out of Israel.
 The first day shall be holy and solemn, and the seventh dayshall be kept with the like solemnity: you shall do no work in them,except those things that belong to eating.
 And you shall observe the feast of the unleavened bread: for inthis same day I will bring forth your army out of the land of Egypt,and you shall keep this day in your generations by a perpetualobservance.
 The first month, the fourteenth day of the month, in theevening, you shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentiethday of the same month, in the evening.
 Seven days there shall not be found any leaven in your houses:he that shall eat leavened bread, his soul shall perish out of theassembly of Israel, whether he be a stranger or born in the land.
 You shall not eat any thing leavened: in all your habitationsyou shall eat unleavened bread.
 And Moses called all the ancients of the children of Israel, andsaid to them: Go take a lamb by your families, and sacrifice the Phase.
 And dip a bunch of hyssop in the blood that is at the door, andsprinkle the transom of the door therewith, and both the door cheeks:let none of you go out of the door of his house till morning.
 For the Lord will pass through striking the Egyptians: and whenhe shall see the blood on the transom, and on both the posts, he willpass over the door of the house, and not suffer the destroyer to comeinto your houses and to hurt you.
 Thou shalt keep this thing as a law for thee and thy childrenfor ever.
 And when you have entered into the land which the Lord will giveyou, as he hath promised, you shall observe these ceremonies.
 And when your children shall say to you: What is the meaning ofthis service?
 You shall say to them: It is the victim of the passage of theLord, when he passed over the houses of the children of Israel inEgypt, striking the Egyptians, and saving our houses. And the peoplebowing themselves, adored.
 And the children of Israel going forth, did as the Lord hadcommanded Moses and Aaron.
 And it came to pass at midnight, the Lord slew every firstbornin the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharao, who sat on histhrone, unto the firstborn of the captive woman that was in the prison,and all the firstborn of cattle.
 And Pharao arose in the night, and all his servants, and allEgypt: and there arose a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a housewherein there lay not one dead.
 And Pharao calling Moses and Aaron, in the night, said: Ariseand go forth from among my people, you and the children of Israel: go,sacrifice to the Lord as you say.
 Your sheep and herds take along with you, as you demanded, anddeparting bless me.
 And the Egyptians pressed the people to go forth out of the landspeedily, saying: We shall all die.
 The people therefore took dough before it was leavened; andtying it in their cloaks, put it on their shoulders.
 And the children of Israel did as Moses had commanded: and theyasked of the Egyptians vessels of silver and gold, and very muchraiment.
 And the Lord gave favour to the people in the sight of theEgyptians, so that they lent unto them: and they stripped theEgyptians.
 And the children of Israel set forward from Ramesse to Socoth,being about six hundred thousand men on foot, beside children.
 And a mixed multitude, without number, went up also with them,sheep and herds, and beasts of divers kinds, exceeding many.
 And they baked the meal, which a little before they had broughtout of Egypt in dough: and they made hearth cakes unleavened: for itcould not be leavened, the Egyptians pressing them to depart, and notsuffering them to make any stay; neither did they think of preparingany meat.
 And the abode of the children of Israel that they made in Egypt,was four hundred and thirty years.
 Which being expired, the same day all the army of the Lord wentforth out of the land of Egypt.
 This is the observable night of the Lord, when he brought themforth out of the land of Egypt: this night all the children of Israelmust observe in their generations.
 And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron: This is the service of thePhase; no foreigner shall eat of it.
 But every bought servant shall be circumcised, and so shall eat.
 The stranger and the hireling shall not eat thereof.
 In one house shall it be eaten, neither shall you carry forth ofthe flesh thereof out of the house, neither shall you break a bonethereof.
 All the assembly of the children of Israel shall keep it.
 And if any stranger be willing to dwell among you, and to keepthe Phase of the Lord, all his males shall first be circumcised, andthen shall he celebrate it according to the manner: and he shall be ashe that is born in the land: but if any man be uncircumcised, he shallnot eat thereof.
 The same law shall be to him that is born in the land, and tothe proselyte that sojourneth with you.
 And all the children of Israel did as the Lord had commandedMoses and Aaron.
 And the same day the Lord brought forth the children of Israelout of the land of Egypt by their companies.
Chapter 13
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:
 Sanctify unto me every firstborn that openeth the womb among thechildren of Israel, as well of men as of beasts: for they are all mine.
 And Moses said to the people: Remember this day in which you cameforth out of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage, for with a stronghand hath the Lord brought you forth out of this place: that you eat noleavened bread.
 This day you go forth in the month of new corn.
 And when the Lord shall have brought thee into the land of theChanaanite, and the Hethite, and the Amorrhite, and the Hevite, and theJebusite, which he swore to thy fathers that he would give thee, a landthat floweth with milk and honey, thou shalt celebrate this manner ofsacred rites in this month.
 Seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread: and on the seventhday shall be the solemnity of the Lord.
 Unleavened bread shall you eat seven days: there shall not beseen any thing leavened with thee, nor in all thy coasts.
 And thou shalt tell thy son in that day, saying: This is what theLord did to me when I came forth out of Egypt.
 And it shall be as a sign in thy hand, and as a memorial beforethy eyes; and that the law of the Lord be always in thy mouth, for witha strong hand the Lord hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt.
 Thou shalt keep this observance at the set time from days todays.
 And when the Lord shall have brought thee into the land of theChanaanite, as he swore to thee and thy fathers, and shall give itthee:
 Thou shalt set apart all that openeth the womb for the Lord, andall that is first brought forth of thy cattle: whatsoever thou shalthave of the male sex, thou shalt consecrate to the Lord.
 The firstborn of an ass thou shalt change for a sheep: and ifthou do not redeem it, thou shalt kill it. And every firstborn of menthou shalt redeem with a price.
 And when thy son shall ask thee to morrow, saying: What is this?thou shalt answer him: With a strong hand did the Lord bring us forthout of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
 For when Pharao was hardened, and would not let us go, the Lordslew every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of man tothe firstborn of beasts: therefore I sacrifice to the Lord all thatopeneth the womb of the male sex, and all the firstborn of my sons Iredeem.
 And it shall be as a sign in thy hand, and as a thing hungbetween thy eyes, for a remembrance: because the Lord hath brought usforth out of Egypt by a strong hand.
 And when Pharao had sent out the people, the Lord led them notby the way of the land of the Philistines, which is near; thinking lestperhaps they would repent, if they should see wars arise against them,and would return into Egypt.
 But he led them about by the way of the desert, which is by theRed Sea: and the children of Israel went up armed out of the land ofEgypt.
 And Moses took Joseph's bones with him: because he had adjuredthe children of Israel, saying: God shall visit you, carry out my bonesfrom hence with you.
 And marching from Socoth, they encamped in Etham, in the utmostcoasts of the wilderness.
 And the Lord went before them to shew the way, by day in apillar of a cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire; that he might bethe guide of their journey at both times.
 There never failed the pillar of the cloud by day, nor thepillar of fire by night, before the people.
Chapter 14
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:
 Speak to the children of Israel: Let them turn and encamp overagainst Phihahiroth, which is between Magdal and the sea over againstBeelsephon: you shall encamp before it upon the sea.
 And Pharao will say of the children of Israel: They arestraitened in the land, the desert hath shut them in.
 And I shall harden his heart and he will pursue you: and I shallbe glorified in Pharao, and in all his army: and the Egyptians shallknow that I am the Lord. And they did so.
 And it was told the king of the Egyptians that the people wasfled: and the heart of Pharao and of his servants was changed withregard to the people, and they said: What meant we to do, that we letIsrael go from serving us?
 So he made ready his chariot, and took all his people with him.
 And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariotsthat were in Egypt: and the captains of the whole army.
 And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharao, king of Egypt, and hepursued the children of Israel; but they were gone forth in a mightyhand.
 And when the Egyptians followed the steps of them who were gonebefore, they found them encamped at the sea side: all Pharao's horseand chariots and the whole army were in Phihahiroth, before Beelsephon.
 And when Pharao drew near, the children of Israel lifting uptheir eyes, saw the Egyptians behind them: and they feared exceedingly,and cried to the Lord.
 And they said to Moses: Perhaps there were no graves in Egypt,therefore thou hast brought us to die in the wilderness: why wouldstthou do this, to lead us out of Egypt?
 Is not this the word that we spoke to thee in Egypt, saying:Depart from us, that we may serve the Egyptians? for it was much betterto serve them, than to die in the wilderness.
 And Moses said to the people: Fear not: stand, and see the greatwonders of the Lord, which he will do this day; for the Egyptians, whomyou see now, you shall see no more for ever.
 The Lord will fight for you, and you shall hold your peace.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Why criest thou to me? Speak to thechildren of Israel to go forward.
 But lift thou up thy rod, and stretch forth thy hand over thesea, and divide it: that the children of Israel may go through themidst of the sea on dry ground.
 And I will harden the heart of the Egyptians to pursue you: andI will be glorified in Pharao, and in all his host, and in his chariotsand in his horsemen.
 And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall beglorified in Pharao, and in his chariots, and in his horsemen.
 And the angel of God, who went before the camp of Israel,removing, went behind them: and together with him the pillar of thecloud, leaving the forepart,
 Stood behind, between the Egyptians' camp and the camp ofIsrael: and it was a dark cloud, and enlightening the night, so thatthey could not come at one another all the night.
 And when Moses had stretched forth his hand over the sea, theLord took it away by a strong and burning wind blowing all the night,and turned it into dry ground: and the water was divided.
 And the children of Israel went in through the midst of the seadried up; for the water was as a wall on their right hand and on theirleft.
 And the Egyptians pursuing went in after them, and all Pharao'shorses, his chariots and horsemen, through the midst of the sea.
 And now the morning watch was come, and behold the Lord lookingupon the Egyptian army through the pillar of fire and of the cloud,slew their host.
 And overthrew the wheels of the chariots, and they were carriedinto the deep. And the Egyptians said: Let us flee from Israel; for theLord fighteth for them against us.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Stretch forth thy hand over the sea,that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariotsand horsemen.
 And when Moses had stretched forth his hand towards the sea, itreturned at the first break of day to the former place: and as theEgyptians were fleeing away, the waters came upon them, and the Lordshut them up in the middle of the waves.
 And the waters returned, and covered the chariots and thehorsemen of all the army of Pharao, who had come into the sea afterthem, neither did there so much as one of them remain.
 But the children of Israel marched through the midst of the seaupon dry land, and the waters were to them as a wall on the right handand on the left:
 And the Lord delivered Israel in that day out of the hands ofthe Egyptians.
 And they saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore, and themighty hand that the Lord had used against them: and the people fearedthe Lord, and they believed the Lord, and Moses his servant.
Chapter 15
 Then Moses and the children of Israel sung this canticle to theLord, and said: Let us sing to the Lord: for he is gloriouslymagnified, the horse and the rider he hath thrown into the sea.
 The Lord is my strength and my praise, and he is become salvationto me: he is my God, and I will glorify him: the God of my father, andI will exalt him.
 The Lord is as a man of war, Almighty is his name.
 Pharao's chariots and his army he hath cast into the sea: hischosen captains are drowned in the Red Sea.
 The depths have covered them, they are sunk to the bottom like astone.
 Thy right hand, O Lord, is magnified in strength: thy right hand,O Lord, hath slain the enemy.
 And in the multitude of thy glory thou hast put down thyadversaries: thou hast sent thy wrath, which hath devoured them likestubble.
 And with the blast of thy anger the waters were gatheredtogether: the flowing water stood, the depths were gathered together inthe midst of the sea.
 The enemy said: I will pursue and overtake, I will divide thespoils, my soul shall have its fill: I will draw my sword, my handshall slay them.
 Thy wind blew and the sea covered them: they sunk as lead in themighty waters.
 Who is like to thee, among the strong, O Lord? who is like tothee, glorious in holiness, terrible and praise-worthy, doing wonders?
 Thou stretchedst forth thy hand, and the earth swallowed them.
 In thy mercy thou hast been a leader to the people which thouhast redeemed: and in thy strength thou hast carried them to thy holyhabitation.
 Nations rose up, and were angry: sorrows took hold on theinhabitants of Philisthiim.
 Then were the princes of Edom troubled, trembling seized on thestout men of Moab: all the inhabitants of Chanaan became stiff.
 Let fear and dread fall upon them, in the greatness of thy arm:let them become immoveable as a stone, until thy people, O Lord, passby: until this thy people pass by, which thou hast possessed.
 Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thyinheritance, in thy most firm habitation, which thou hast made, O Lord;thy sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established.
 The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.
 For Pharao went in on horseback with his chariots and horsemeninto the sea: and the Lord brought back upon them the waters of thesea: but the children of Israel walked on dry ground in the midstthereof.
 So Mary the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel inher hand: and all the women went forth after her with timbrels and withdances.
 And she began the song to them, saying: Let us sing to the Lord,for he is gloriously magnified, the horse and his rider he hath throwninto the sea.
 And Moses brought Israel from the Red Sea, and they went forthinto the wilderness of Sur: and they marched three days through thewilderness, and found no water.
 And they came into Mara, and they could not drink the waters ofMara because they were bitter: whereupon he gave a name also agreeableto the place, calling it Mara, that is, bitterness.
 And the people murmured against Moses, saying: What shall wedrink?
 But he cried to the Lord, and he shewed him a tree, which whenhe had cast into the waters, they were turned into sweetness. There heappointed him ordinances, and judgments, and there he proved him,
 Saying: If thou wilt hear the voice of the Lord thy God, and dowhat is right before him, and obey his commandments, and keep all hisprecepts, none of the evils that I laid upon Egypt, will I bring uponthee: for I am the Lord thy healer.
 And the children of Israel came into Elim, where there weretwelve fountains of water, and seventy palm trees: and they encamped bythe waters.
Chapter 16
 And they set forward from Elim, and all the multitude of thechildren of Israel came into the desert of Sin, which is between Elimand Sinai: the fifteenth day of the second month, after they came outof the land of Egypt.
 And all the congregation of the children of Israel murmuredagainst Moses and Aaron in the wilderness.
 And the children of Israel said to them: Would to God we had diedby the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat over thefleshpots, and ate bread to the full: Why have you brought us into thisdesert, that you might destroy all the multitude with famine?
 And the Lord said to Moses: Behold I will rain bread from heavenfor you; let the people go forth, and gather what is sufficient forevery day: that I may prove them whether they will walk in my law, ornot.
 But the sixth day let them provide for to bring in: and let it bedouble to that they were wont to gather every day.
 And Moses and Aaron said to the children of Israel In the eveningyou shall know that the Lord hath brought you forth out of the land ofEgypt:
 And in the morning you shall see the glory of the Lord: for hehath heard your murmuring against the Lord: but as for us, what are we,that you mutter against us?
 And Moses said: In the evening the Lord will give you flesh toeat, and in the morning bread to the full: for he hath heard yourmurmurings, with which you have murmured against him, for what are we?your murmuring is not against us, but against the Lord.
 Moses also said to Aaron: Say to the whole congregation of thechildren of Israel: Come before the Lord; for he hath heard yourmurmuring.
 And when Aaron spoke to all the assembly of the children ofIsrael, they looked towards the wilderness; and behold the glory of theLord appeared in a cloud.
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:
 I have heard the murmuring of the children of Israel, say tothem: In the evening you shall eat flesh, and in the morning you shallhave your fill of bread; and you shall know that I am the Lord yourGod.
 So it came to pass in the evening, that quails coming up,covered the camp: and in the morning a dew lay round about the camp.
 And when it had covered the face of the earth, it appeared inthe wilderness small, and as it were beaten with a pestle, like untothe hoar frost on the ground.
 And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one toanother: Manhu! which signifieth: What is this! for they knew not whatit was. And Moses said to them: This is the bread which the Lord hathgiven you to eat.
 This is the word that the Lord hath commanded: Let every onegather of it as much as is enough to eat; a gomor for every man,according to the number of your souls that dwell in a tent, so shallyou take of it.
 And the children of Israel did so: and they gathered, one more,another less.
 And they measured by the measure of a gomor: neither had he morethat had gathered more; nor did he find less that had provided less:but every one had gathered, according to what they were able to eat.
 And Moses said to them: Let no man leave thereof till themorning.
 And they hearkened not to him, but some of them left until themorning, and it began to be full of worms, and it putrified, and Moseswas angry with them.
 Now every one of them gathered in the morning, as much as mightsuffice to eat: and after the sun grew hot, it melted.
 But on the sixth day they gathered twice as much, that is, twogomors every man: and all the rulers of the multitude came, and toldMoses.
 And he said to them: This is what the Lord hath spoken: Tomorrow is the rest of the sabbath sanctified to the Lord. Whatsoeverwork is to be done, do it; and the meats that are to be dressed, dressthem; and whatsoever shall remain, lay it up until the morning.
 And they did so as Moses had commanded, and it did not putrify,neither was there worm found in it.
 And Moses said: Eat it to day, because it is the sabbath of theLord: to day it shall not be found in the field.
 Gather it six days; but on the seventh day is the sabbath of theLord, therefore it shall not be found.
 And the seventh day came; and some of the people going forth togather, found none.
 And the Lord said to Moses: How long will you refuse to keep mycommandments, and my law?
 See that the Lord hath given you the sabbath, and for thisreason on the sixth day he giveth you a double provision: let each manstay at home, and let none go forth out of his place the seventh day.
 And the people kept the sabbath on the seventh day.
 And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna: and itwas like coriander seed, white, and the taste thereof like to flourwith honey.
 And Moses said: This is the word which the Lord hath commanded:Fill a gomor of it, and let it be kept unto generations to comehereafter; that they may know the bread, wherewith I fed you in thewilderness when you were brought forth out of the land of Egypt.
 And Moses said to Aaron: Take a vessel, and put manna into it,as much as a gomor can hold; and lay it up before the Lord, to keepunto your generations,
 As the Lord commanded Moses. And Aaron put it in the tabernacleto be kept.
 And the children of Israel ate manna forty years, till they cameto a habitable land: with this meat were they fed, until they reachedthe borders of the land of Chanaan.
 Now a gomor is the tenth part of an ephi.
Chapter 17
 Then all the multitude of the children of Israel setting forwardfrom the desert of Sin, by their mansions, according to the word of theLord, encamped in Raphidim, where there was no water for the people todrink.
 And they chode with Moses, and said: Give us water, that we maydrink. And Moses answered them: Why chide you with me? Wherefore doyou tempt the Lord?
 So the people were thirsty there for want of water, and murmuredagainst Moses, saying: Why didst thou make us go forth out of Egypt, tokill us and our children, and our beasts with thirst?
 And Moses cried to the Lord, saying: What shall I do to thispeople? Yet a little more and they will stone me.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Go before the people, and take withthee of the ancients of Israel: and take in thy hand the rod wherewiththou didst strike the river, and go.
 Behold I will stand there before thee, upon the rock Horeb, andthou shalt strike the rock, and water shall come out of it that thepeople may drink. Moses did so before the ancients of Israel:
 And he called the name of that place Temptation, because of thechiding of the children of Israel, and for that they tempted the Lord,saying: Is the Lord amongst us or not?
 And Amalec came, and fought against Israel in Raphidim.
 And Moses said to Josue: Choose out men; and go out and fightagainst Amalec: tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill, havingthe rod of God in my hand.
 Josue did as Moses had spoken, and he fought against Amalec; butMoses, and Aaron, and Hur, went up upon the top of the hill.
 And when Moses lifted up his hands, Israel overcame; but if helet them down a little, Amalec overcame.
 And Moses's hands were heavy: so they took a stone, and putunder him, and he sat on it: and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands onboth sides. And it came to pass, that his hands were not weary untilsunset.
 And Josue put Amalec and his people to flight, by the edge ofthe sword.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Write this for a memorial in a book,and deliver it to the ears of Josue; for I will destroy the memory ofAmalec from under heaven.
 And Moses built an altar; and called the name thereof, The Lord,my exaltation, saying:
 Because the hand of the throne of the Lord, and the war of theLord shall be against Amalec, from generation to generation.
Chapter 18
 And when Jethro the priest of Madian, the kinsman of Moses, hadheard all the things that God had done to Moses, and to Israel hispeople, and that the Lord had brought forth Israel out of Egypt:
 He took Sephora, the wife of Moses, whom he had sent back:
 And her two sons, of whom one was called Gersam: his fathersaying, I have been a stranger in a foreign country.
 And the other Eliezer: For the God of my father, said he, is myhelper, and hath delivered me from the sword of Pharao.
 And Jethro, the kinsman of Moses, came with his sons, and hiswife to Moses into the desert, where he was camped by the mountain ofGod.
 And he sent word to Moses, saying: I Jethro, thy kinsman, come tothee, and thy wife, and thy two sons with her.
 And he went out to meet his kinsman, and worshipped and kissedhim: and they saluted one another with words of peace. And when he wascome into the tent,
 Moses told his kinsman all that the Lord had done to Pharao, andthe Egyptians in favour of Israel: and all the labour which hadbefallen them in the journey, and that the Lord had delivered them.
 And Jethro rejoiced for all the good things that the Lord haddone to Israel, because he had delivered them out of the hands of theEgyptians.
 And he said: Blessed is the Lord, who hath delivered his peopleout of the hand of Egypt.
 Now I know, that the Lord is great above all gods; because theydealt proudly against them.
 So Jethro, the kinsman of Moses, offered holocausts andsacrifices to God: and Aaron and all the ancients of Israel came, toeat bread with him before God.
 And the next day Moses sat to judge the people, who stood byMoses from morning until night.
 And when his kinsman had seen all things that he did among thepeople, he said: What is it that thou dost among the people? Whysittest thou alone, and all the people wait from morning till night?
 And Moses answered him: The people come to me to seek thejudgment of God?
 And when any controversy falleth out among them, they come to meto judge between them, and to shew the precepts of God, and his laws.
 But he said: The thing thou dost is not good.
 Thou art spent with foolish labour, both thou, and this peoplethat is with thee; the business is above thy strength, thou alone canstnot bear it.
 But hear my words and counsels, and God shall be with thee. Bethou to the people in those things that pertain to God, to bring theirwords to him:
 And to shew the people the ceremonies, and the manner ofworshipping; and the way wherein they ought to walk, and the work thatthey ought to do.
 And provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, inwhom there is truth, and that hate avarice, and appoint of them rulersof thousands, and of hundreds, and of fifties, and of tens,
 Who may judge the people at all times: and when any great mattersoever shall fall out, let them refer it to thee, and let them judgethe lesser matters only: that so it may be lighter for thee, the burdenbeing shared out unto others.
 If thou dost this, thou shalt fulfil the commandment of God, andshalt be able to bear his precepts: and all this people shall return totheir places with peace.
 And when Moses heard this, he did all things that he hadsuggested unto him.
 And choosing able men out of all Israel, he appointed themrulers of the people, rulers over thousands, and over hundreds, andover fifties, and over tens.
 And they judged the people at all times: and whatsoever was ofgreater difficulty they referred to him, and they judged the easiercases only.
 And he let his kinsman depart: and he returned and went into hisown country.
Chapter 19
 In the third month of the departure of Israel out of the land ofEgypt, on this day they came into the wilderness of Sinai:
 For departing out of Raphidim, and coming to the desert of Sinai,they camped in the same place, and there Israel pitched their tentsover against the mountain.
 And Moses went up to God; and the Lord called unto him from themountain, and said: Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tellthe children of Israel:
 You have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, how I havecarried you upon the wings of eagles, and have taken you to myself.
 If therefore you will hear my voice, and keep my covenant, youshall be my peculiar possession above all people: for all the earth ismine.
 And you shall be to me a priestly kingdom, and a holy nation.These are the words thou shalt speak to the children of Israel.
 Moses came; and calling together the elders of the people, hedeclared all the words which the Lord had commanded.
 And all the people answered together: All that the Lord hathspoken, we will do. And when Moses had related the people's words tothe Lord,
 The Lord said to him: Lo, now will I come to thee in the darknessof a cloud, that the people may hear me speaking to thee, and maybelieve thee for ever. And Moses told the words of the people to theLord.
 And he said to him: Go to the people, and sanctify them to day,and to morrow, and let them wash their garments.
 And let them be ready against the third day; for on the thirdday the Lord will come down in the sight of all the people, upon MountSinai.
 And thou shalt appoint certain limits to the people round about,and thou shalt say to them: Take heed ye go not up into the mount, andthat ye touch not the borders thereof: every one that toucheth themount, dying he shall die.
 No hands shall touch him, but he shall be stoned to death, or heshall be shot through with arrows: whether it be beast, or man, heshall not live. When the trumpet shall begin to sound, then let them goup into the mount.
 And Moses came down from the mount to the people, and sanctifiedthem. And when they had washed their garments,
 He said to them: Be ready against the third day, and come notnear your wives.
 And now the third day was come, and the morning appeared: andbehold thunders began to be heard, and lightning to flash, and a verythick cloud to cover the mount, and the noise of the trumpet soundedexceeding loud; and the people that was in the camp, feared.
 And when Moses had brought them forth to meet God, from theplace of the camp, they stood at the bottom of the mount.
 And all Mount Sinai was on a smoke: because the Lord was comedown upon it in fire, and the smoke arose from it as out of a furnace:and all the mount was terrible.
 And the sound of the trumpet grew by degrees louder and louder,and was drawn out to a greater length: Moses spoke, and God answeredhim.
 And the Lord came down upon Mount Sinai, in the very top of themount, and he called Moses unto the top thereof. And when he was goneup thither,
 He said unto him: Go down, and charge the people; lest theyshould have a mind to pass the limits to see the Lord, and a very greatmultitude of them should perish.
 The priests also that come to the Lord, let them be sanctified,lest he strike them.
 And Moses said to the Lord: The people cannot come up to MountSinai: for thou didst charge, and command, saying: Set limits about themount, and sanctify it.
 And the Lord said to him: Go, get thee down; and thou shalt comeup, thou and Aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the peoplepass the limits, nor come up to the Lord, lest he kill them.
 And Moses went down to the people and told them all.
Chapter 20
 And the Lord spoke all these words:
 I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt,out of the house of bondage.
 Thou shalt not have strange gods before me.
 Thou shalt not make to thyself a graven thing, nor the likenessof any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor ofthose things that are in the waters under the earth.
7; Num. 21.8, 9; 1 Chron. or Paralip. 28.18, 19; 2 Chron. orParalip. 3.10.
 Thou shalt not adore them, nor serve them: I am the Lord thy God,mighty, jealous, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon thechildren, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me:
 And shewing mercy unto thousands to them that love me, and keepmy commandments.
 Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for theLord will not hold him guiltless that shall take the name of the Lordhis God in vain.
 Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day.
 Six days shalt thou labour, and shalt do all thy works.
 But on the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: thoushalt do no work on it, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thymanservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy beast, nor the stranger thatis within thy gates.
 For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and the sea, andall things that are in them, and rested on the seventh day: thereforethe Lord blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it.
 Honour thy father and thy mother, that thou mayst be longlivedupon the land which the Lord thy God will give thee.
 Thou shalt not kill.
 Thou shalt not commit adultery.
 Thou shalt not steal.
 Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.
 Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house; neither shalt thoudesire his wife, nor his servant, nor his handmaid, nor his ox, nor hisass, nor any thing that is his.
 And all the people saw the voices and the flames, and the soundof the trumpet, and the mount smoking; and being terrified and struckwith fear, they stood afar off,
 Saying to Moses: Speak thou to us, and we will hear: let not theLord speak to us, lest we die.
 And Moses said to the people: Fear not; for God is come to proveyou, and that the dread of him might be in you, and you should not sin.
 And the people stood afar off. But Moses went to the dark cloudwherein God was.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Thus shalt thou say to the childrenof Israel: You have seen that I have spoken to you from heaven.
 You shall not make gods of silver, nor shall you make toyourselves gods of gold.
 You shall make an altar of earth unto me, and you shall offerupon it your holocausts and peace offerings, your sheep and oxen, inevery place where the memory of my name shall be: I will come to thee,and will bless thee.
 And if thou make an altar of stone unto me, thou shalt not buildit of hewn stones; for if thou lift up a tool upon it, it shall bedefiled.
 Thou shalt not go up by steps unto my altar, lest thy nakednessbe discovered.
Chapter 21
 These are the judgments which thou shalt set before them.
 If thou buy a Hebrew servant, six years shall he serve thee; inthe seventh he shall go out free for nothing.
 With what raiment he came in, with the like let him go out: ifhaving a wife, his wife also shall go out with him.
 But if his master gave him a wife, and she hath borne sons anddaughters; the woman and her children shall be her master's: but hehimself shall go out with his raiment.
 And if the servant shall say: I love my master and my wife andchildren, I will not go out free:
 His master shall bring him to the gods, and he shall be set tothe door and the posts, and he shall bore his ear through with an awl:and he shall be his servant for ever.
 If any man sell his daughter to be a servant, she shall not goout as bondwomen are wont to go out.
 If she displease the eyes of her master to whom she wasdelivered, he shall let her go: but he shall have no power to sell herto a foreign nation, if he despise her.
 But if he have betrothed her to his son, he shall deal with herafter the manner of daughters.
 And if he take another wife for him, he shall provide her amarriage, and raiment, neither shall he refuse the price of herchastity.
 If he do not these three things, she shall go out free withoutmoney.
 He that striketh a man with a will to kill him, shall be put todeath.
 But he that did not lie in wait for him, but God delivered himinto his hands: I will appoint thee a place to which he must flee.
 If a man kill his neighbour on set purpose, and by lying in waitfor him: thou shalt take him away from my altar that he may die.
 He that striketh his father or mother, shall be put to death.
 He that shall steal a man, and sell him, being convicted of theguilt, shall be put to death.
 He that curseth his father or mother, shall die the death.
 If men quarrel, and the one strike his neighbour with a stone,or with his fist, and he die not, but keepeth his bed:
 If he rise again and walk abroad upon his staff, he that struckhim shall be quit, yet so that he make restitution for his work, andfor his expenses upon the physicians.
 He that striketh his bondman, or bondwoman, with a rod, and theydie under his hands, shall be guilty of the crime.
 But if the party remain alive a day or two, he shall not besubject to the punishment, because it is his money.
 If men quarrel, and one strike a woman with child and shemiscarry indeed, but live herself: he shall be answerable for so muchdamage as the woman's husband shall require, and as arbiters shallaward.
 But if her death ensue thereupon, he shall render life for life,
 Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
 Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.
 If any man strike the eye of his manservant or maidservant, andleave them but one eye, he shall let them go free for the eye which heput out.
 Also if he strike out a tooth of his manservant or maidservant,he shall in like manner make them free.
 If an ox gore a man or a woman, and they die, he shall bestoned: and his flesh shall not be eaten, but the owner of the ox shallbe quit.
 But if the ox was wont to push with his horn yesterday, and theday before, and they warned his master, and he did not shut him up, andhe shall kill a man or a woman: then the ox shall be stoned, and hisowner also shall be put to death.
 And if they set a price upon him, he shall give for his lifewhatsoever is laid upon him.
 If he have gored a son, or a daughter, he shall fall under thelike sentence.
 If he assault a bondman or bondwoman, he shall give thirtysicles of silver to their master, and the ox shall be stoned.
 If a man open a pit, and dig one, and cover it not, and an ox oran ass fall into it,
 The owner of the pit shall pay the price of the beasts: and thatwhich is dead shall be his own.
 If one man's ox gore another man's ox, and he die: they shallsell the live ox, and shall divide the price, and the carcass of thatwhich died they shall part between them:
 But if he knew that his ox was wont to push yesterday, and theday before, and his master did not keep him in; he shall pay ox for ox,and shall take the whole carcass.
Chapter 22
 If any man steal an ox or a sheep, and kill or sell it: he shallrestore five oxen for one ox, and four sheep for one sheep.
 If a thief be found breaking open a house or undermining it, andbe wounded so as to die: he that slew him shall not be guilty of blood.
 But if he did this when the sun is risen, he hath committedmurder, and he shall die. If he have not wherewith to make restitutionfor the theft, he shall be sold.
 If that which he stole be found with him, alive, either ox, orass, or sheep: he shall restore double.
 If any man hurt a field or a vineyard, and put in his beast tofeed upon that which is other men's: he shall restore the best ofwhatsoever he hath in his own field, or in his vineyard, according tothe estimation of the damage.
 If a fire breaking out light upon thorns, and catch stacks ofcorn, or corn standing in the fields, he that kindled the fire shallmake good the loss.
 If a man deliver money, or any vessel unto his friend to keep,and they be stolen away from him that received them: if the thief befound, he shall restore double:
 If the thief be not known, the master of the house shall bebrought to the gods, and shall swear that he did not lay his hand uponhis neighbour's goods,
 To do any fraud, either in ox, or in ass, or sheep, or raiment,or any thing that may bring damage: the cause of both parties shallcome to the gods: and if they give judgment, he shall restore double tohis neighbour.
 If a man deliver ass, ox, sheep, or any beast, to hisneighbour's custody, and it die, or be hurt, or be taken by enemies,and no man saw it:
 There shall be an oath between them, that he did not put forthhis hand to his neighbour's goods: and the owner shall accept of theoath, and he shall not be compelled to make restitution.
 But if it were taken away by stealth, he shall make the lossgood to the owner.
 If it were eaten by a beast, let him bring to him that which wasslain, and he shall not make restitution.
 If a man borrow of his neighbour any of these things, and it behurt or die, the owner not being present, he shall be obliged to makerestitution.
 But if the owner be present, he shall not make restitution,especially if it were hired, and came for the hire of his work.
 If a man seduce a virgin not yet espoused, and lie with her: heshall endow her, and have her to wife.
 If the maid's father will not give her to him, he shall givemoney according to the dowry, which virgins are wont to receive.
 Wizards thou shalt not suffer to live.
 Whosoever copulateth with a beast; shall be put to death.
 He that sacrificeth to gods, shall be put to death, save only tothe Lord.
 Thou shalt not molest a stranger, nor afflict him: foryourselves also were strangers in the land of Egypt.
 You shall not hurt a widow or an orphan.
 If you hurt them, they will cry out to me, and I will hear theircry:
 And my rage shall be enkindled, and I will strike you with thesword, and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.
 If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor, thatdwelleth with thee, thou shalt not be hard upon them as an extortioner,nor oppress them with usuries.
 If thou take of thy neighbour a garment in pledge, thou shaltgive it him again before sunset.
 For that same is the only thing, wherewith he is covered, theclothing of his body, neither hath he any other to sleep in: if he cryto me, I will hear him, because I am compassionate.
 Thou shalt not speak ill of the gods, and the prince of thypeople thou shalt not curse.
 Thou shalt not delay to pay thy tithes and thy firstfruits: thoushalt give the firstborn of thy sons to me.
 Thou shalt do the same with the firstborn of thy oxen also andsheep: seven days let it be with its dam: the eighth day thou shaltgive it to me.
 You shall be holy men to me: the flesh that beasts have tastedof before, you shall not eat, but shall cast it to the dogs.
Chapter 23
 Thou shalt not receive the voice of a lie: neither shalt thoujoin thy hand to bear false witness for a wicked person.
 Thou shalt not follow the multitude to do evil: neither shaltthou yield in judgment, to the opinion of the most part, to stray fromthe truth.
 Neither shalt thou favour a poor man in judgment.
 If thou meet thy enemy's ox or ass going astray, bring it back tohim.
 If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lie underneath hisburden, thou shalt not pass by, but shalt lift him up with him.
 Thou shalt not go aside in the poor man's judgment.
 Thou shalt fly lying. The innocent and just person thou shalt notput to death: because I abhor the wicked.
 Neither shalt thou take bribes, which even blind the wise, andpervert the words of the just.
 Thou shalt not molest a stranger, for you know the hearts ofstrangers: for you also were strangers in the land of Egypt.
 Six years thou shalt sow thy ground, and shalt gather the cornthereof.
 But the seventh year thou shalt let it alone, and suffer it torest, that the poor of thy people may eat, and whatsoever shall beleft, let the beasts of the field eat it: so shalt thou do with thyvineyard and thy oliveyard.
 Six days thou shalt work: the seventh day thou shalt cease, thatthy ox and thy ass may rest: and the son of thy handmaid and thestranger may be refreshed.
 Keep all things that I have said to you. And by the name ofstrange gods you shall not swear, neither shall it be heard out of yourmouth.
 Three times every year you shall celebrate feasts to me.
 Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread. Seven days shaltthou eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, in the time of themonth of new corn, when thou didst come forth out of Egypt: thou shaltnot appear empty before me.
 And the feast of the harvest of the firstfruits of thy work,whatsoever thou hast sown in the field. The feast also in the end ofthe year, when thou hast gathered in all thy corn out of the field.
 Thrice a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thyGod.
 Thou shalt not sacrifice the blood of my victim upon leaven,neither shall the fat of my solemnity remain until the morning.
 Thou shalt carry the first-fruits of the corn of thy ground tothe house of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not boil a kid in the milk ofhis dam.
 Behold I will send my angel, who shall go before thee, and keepthee in thy journey, and bring thee into the place that I haveprepared.
 Take notice of him, and hear his voice, and do not think him oneto be contemned: for he will not forgive when thou hast sinned, and myname is in him.
 But if thou wilt hear hi voice, and do all that I speak, I willbe an enemy to thy enemies, and will afflict them that afflict thee.
 And my angel shall go before thee, and shall bring thee in untothe Amorrhite, and the Hethite, and the Pherexite, and the Chanaanite,and the Hevite, and the Jebuzite, whom I will destroy.
 Thou shalt not adore their gods, nor serve them. Thou shalt notdo their works, but shalt destroy them, and break their statues.
 And you shall serve the Lord your God, that I may bless yourbread and your waters, and may take away sickness from the midst ofthee.
 There shall not be one fruitless nor barren in thy land: I willfill the number of thy days.
 I will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the peopleto whom thou shalt come: and will turn the backs of all thy enemiesbefore thee:
 Sending out hornets before, that shall drive away the Hevite,and the Chanaanite, and the Hethite, before thou come in.
 I will not cast them out from thy face in one year; lest theland be brought into a wilderness, and the beasts multiply againstthee.
 By little and little I will drive them out from before thee,till thou be increased, and dost possess the land.
 And I will set thy bounds from the Red Sea to the sea of thePalestines, and from the desert to the river: I will deliver theinhabitants of the land into your hands, and will drive them out frombefore you.
 Thou shalt not enter into league with them, nor with their gods.
 Let them not dwell in thy land, lest perhaps they make thee sinagainst me, if thou serve their gods; which, undoubtedly, will be ascandal to thee.
Chapter 24
 And he said to Moses: Come up to the Lord, thou, and Aaron, Nadaband Abiu, and seventy of the ancients of Israel, and you shall adoreafar off.
 And Moses alone shall come up to the Lord, but they shall notcome nigh; neither shall the people come up with him.
 So Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord, andall the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice: We willdo all the words of the Lord, which he hath spoken.
 And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord: and rising in themorning, he built an altar at the foot of the mount, and twelve titlesaccording to the twelve tribes of Israel.
 And he sent young men of the children of Israel, and they offeredholocausts, and sacrificed pacific victims of calves to the Lord.
 Then Moses took half of the blood, and put it into bowls; and therest he poured upon the altar.
 And taking the book of the covenant, he read it in the hearing ofthe people: and they said: All things that the Lord hath spoken, wewill do, we will be obedient.
 And he took the blood and sprinkled it upon the people, and hesaid: This is the blood of the covenant, which the Lord hath made withyou concerning all these words.
 Then Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abiu, and seventy of the ancientsof Israel went up:
 And they saw the God of Israel: and under his feet as it were awork of sapphire stone, and as the heaven, when clear.
 Neither did he lay his hand upon those of the children ofIsrael, that retired afar off, and they saw God, and they did eat anddrink.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Come up to me into the mount, and bethere; and I will give thee tables of stone, and the law, and thecommandments which I have written; that thou mayest teach them.
 Moses rose up, and his minister Josue: and Moses going up intothe mount of God,
 Said to the ancients: Wait ye here till we return to you. Youhave Aaron and Hur with you: if any question shall arise, you shallrefer it to them.
 And when Moses was gone up, a cloud covered the mount.
 And the glory of the Lord dwelt upon Sinai, covering it with acloud six days: and the seventh day he called him out of the midst ofthe cloud.
 And the sight of the glory of the Lord, was like a burning fireupon the top of the mount, in the eyes of the children of Israel.
 And Moses entering into the midst of the cloud, went up into themountain: And he was there forty days and forty nights.
Chapter 25
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:
 Speak to the children of Israel, that they bring firstfruits tome: of every man that offereth of his own accord, you shall take them.
 And these are the things you must take: Gold, and silver, andbrass,
 Violet and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine linen, andgoats' hair,
 And rams' skins dyed red, and violet skins, and setim wood:
 Oil to make lights: spices for ointment, and for sweetsmellingincense:
 Onyx stones, and precious stones to adorn the ephod and therational.
 And they shall make me a sanctuary, and I will dwell in the midstof them:
 According to all the likeness of the tabernacle which I will shewthee, and of all the vessels for the service thereof: and thus youshall make it:
 Frame an ark of setim wood, the length whereof shall be of twocubits and a half; the breadth, a cubit and a half; the height,likewise, a cubit and a half.
 And thou shalt overlay it with the purest gold, within andwithout; and over it thou shalt make a golden crown round about:
 And four golden rings, which thou shalt put at the four cornersof the ark: let two rings be on the one side, and two on the other.
 Thou shalt make bars also of setim wood, and shalt overlay themwith gold.
 And thou shalt put them in through the rings that are in thesides of the ark, that it may be carried on them:
 And they shall be always in the rings, neither shall they at anytime be drawn out of them.
 And thou shalt put in the ark the testimony which I will givethee.
 Thou shalt make also a propitiatory of the purest gold: thelength thereof shall be two cubits and a half, and the breadth a cubitand a half.
 Thou shalt make also two cherubims of beaten gold, on the twosides of the oracle.
 Let one cherub be on the one side, and the other on the other.
 Let them cover both sides of the propitiatory, spreading theirwings, and covering the oracle, and let them look one towards theother, their faces being turned towards the propitiatory wherewith theark is to be covered.
 In which thou shalt put the testimony that I will give thee.
 Thence will I give orders, and will speak to thee over thepropitiatory, and from the midst of the two cherubims, which shall beupon the ark of the testimony, all things which I will command thechildren of Israel by thee.
 Thou shalt make a table also of setim wood, of two cubits inlength, and a cubit in breadth, and a cubit and a half in height.
 And thou shalt overlay it with the purest gold: and thou shaltmake to it a golden ledge round about.
 And to the ledge itself a polished crown, four inches high; andover the same another little golden crown.
 Thou shalt prepare also four golden rings, and shalt put them inthe four corners of the same table, over each foot.
 Under the crown shall the golden rings be, that the bars may beput through them, and the table may be carried.
 The bars also themselves thou shalt make of setim wood, andshalt overlay them with gold, to bear up the table.
 Thou shalt prepare also dishes, and bowls, censers, and cups,wherein the libations are to be offered, of the purest gold.
 And thou shalt set upon the table loaves of proposition in mysight always.
 Thou shalt make also a candlestick of beaten work, of the finestgold, the shaft thereof, and the branches, the cups, and the bowls, andthe lilies going forth from it.
 Six branches shall come out of the sides, three out of one side,and three out of the other.
 Three cups as it were nuts to every branch, and a bowl withal,and a lily: and three cups likewise of the fashion of nuts in the otherbranch, and a bowl withal, and a lily. Such shall be the work of thesix branches, that are to come out from the shaft:
 And in the candlestick itself shall be four cups in the mannerof a nut, and at every one bowls and lilies.
 Bowls under two branches in three places, which together makesix, coming forth out of one shaft.
 And both the bowls and the branches shall be of the same beatenwork of the purest gold.
 Thou shalt make also seven lamps, and shalt set them upon thecandlestick, to give light over against.
 The snuffers also, and where the snuffings shall be put out,shall be made of the purest gold.
 The whole weight of the candlestick, with all the furniturethereof, shall be a talent of the purest gold.
 Look, and make it according to the pattern that was shewn theein the mount.
Chapter 26
 And thou shalt make the tabernacle in this manner: Thou shaltmake ten curtains of fine twisted linen, and violet and purple, andscarlet twice dyed, diversified with embroidery.
 The length of one curtain shall be twenty-eight cubits; thebreadth shall be four cubits. All the curtains shall be of one measure.
 Five curtains shall be joined one to another, and the other fiveshall be coupled together in like manner.
 Thou shalt make loops of violet in the sides and tops of thecurtains, that they may be joined one to another.
 Every curtain shall have fifty loops on both sides, so set on,that one loop may be against another loop, and one may be fitted to theother.
 Thou shalt make also fifty rings of gold, wherewith the veils ofthe curtains are to be joined, that it may be made one tabernacle.
 Thou shalt make also eleven curtains of goats' hair, to cover thetop of the tabernacle.
 The length of one hair-curtain shall be thirty cubits; and thebreadth, four: the measure of all the curtains shall be equal.
 Five of which thou shalt couple by themselves, and the six othersthou shalt couple one to another, so as to double the sixth curtain inthe front of the roof.
 Thou shalt make also fifty loops in the edge of one curtain,that it may be joined with the other: and fifty loops in the edge ofthe other curtain, that it may be coupled with its fellow.
 Thou shalt make also fifty buckles of brass, wherewith the loopsmay be joined, that of all there may be made one covering.
 And that which shall remain of the curtains, that are preparedfor the roof, to wit, one curtain that is over and above, with the halfthereof thou shalt cover the back parts of the tabernacle.
 And there shall hang down a cubit on the one side, and anotheron the other side, which is over and above in the length of thecurtains, fencing both sides of the tabernacle.
 Thou shalt make also another cover to the roof of rams' skinsdyed red: and over that again another cover of violet coloured skins.
 Thou shalt make also the boards of the tabernacle standingupright of setim wood.
 Let every one of them be ten cubits in length, and in breadthone cubit and a half.
 In the sides of the boards shall be made two mortises, wherebyone board may be joined to another board: and after this manner shallall the boards be prepared.
 Of which twenty shall be in the south side southward.
 For which thou shalt cast forty sockets of silver, that underevery board may be put two sockets at the two corners.
 In the second side also of the tabernacle that looketh to thenorth, there shall be twenty boards,
 Having forty sockets of silver, two sockets shall be put undereach board.
 But on the west side of the tabernacle thou shalt make sixboards.
 And again other two which shall be erected in the corners at theback of the tabernacle.
 And they shall be joined together from beneath unto the top, andone joint shall hold them all. The like joining shall be observed forthe two boards also that are to be put in the corners.
 And they shall be in all eight boards, and their silver socketssixteen, reckoning two sockets for each board.
 Thou shalt make also five bars of setim wood, to hold togetherthe boards on one side of the tabernacle.
 And five others on the other side, and as many at the west side:
 And they shall be put along by the midst of the boards, from oneend to the other.
 The boards also themselves thou shalt overlay with gold, andshalt cast rings of gold to be set upon them, for places for the barsto hold together the boardwork: which bars thou shalt cover with platesof gold.
 And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the patternthat was shewn thee in the mount.
 Thou shalt make also a veil of violet, and purple, and scarlettwice dyed, and fine twisted linen, wrought with embroidered work andgoodly variety:
 And thou shalt hang it up before four pillars of setim wood,which themselves also shall be overlaid with gold, and shall have headsof gold, but sockets of silver.
 And the veil shall be hanged on with rings, and within it thoushalt put the ark of the testimony, and the sanctuary and the holy ofthe holies shall be divided with it.
 And thou shalt set the propitiatory upon the ark of thetestimony, in the holy of holies.
 And the table without the veil, and over against the table thecandlestick in the south side of the tabernacle: for the table shallstand in the north side.
 Thou shalt make also a hanging in the entrance of the tabernacleof violet, and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine twisted linenwith embroidered work.
 And thou shalt overlay with gold five pillars of setim wood,before which the hanging shall be drawn: their heads shall be of gold,and the sockets of brass.
Chapter 27
 Thou shalt make also an altar of setim wood, which shall be fivecubits long, and as many broad, that is four square, and three cubitshigh.
 And there shall be horns at the four corners of the same: andthou shalt cover it with brass.
 And thou shalt make for the uses thereof pans to receive theashes, and tongs and fleshhooks, and firepans: all its vessels thoushalt make of brass.
 And a grate of brass in manner of a net; at the four corners ofwhich, shall be four rings of brass,
 Which thou shalt put under the hearth of the altar: and the grateshall be even to the midst of the altar.
 Thou shalt make also two bars for the altar, of setim wood, whichthou shalt cover with plates of brass:
 And thou shalt draw them through rings, and they shall be on bothsides of the altar to carry it.
 Thou shalt not make it solid, but empty and hollow in the inside,as it was shewn thee in the mount.
 Thou shalt make also the court of the tabernacle, in the southside whereof southward there shall be hangings of fine twisted linen ofa hundred cubits long for one side.
 And twenty pillars with as many sockets of brass, the heads ofwhich, with their engraving, shall be of silver.
 In like manner also on the north side there shall be hangings ofa hundred cubits long, twenty pillars, and as many sockets of brass,and their heads with their engraving of silver.
 But in the breadth of the court, that looketh to the west, thereshall be hangings of fifty cubits, and ten pillars, and as manysockets.
 In that breadth also of the court, which looketh to the east,there shall be fifty cubits.
 In which there shall be for one side, hangings of fifteencubits, and three pillars, and as many sockets.
 And in the other side, there shall be hangings of fifteencubits, with three pillars, and as many sockets.
 And in the entrance of the court there shall be made a hangingof twenty cubits of violet and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and finetwisted linen, with embroidered work: it shall have four pillars, withas many sockets.
 All the pillars of the court round about shall be garnished withplates of silver, silver heads, and sockets of brass.
 In length the court shall take up a hundred cubits, in breadthfifty, the height shall be of five cubits, and it shall be made of finetwisted linen, and shall have sockets of brass.
 All the vessels of the tabernacle for all uses and ceremonies,and the pins both of it and of the court, thou shalt make of brass.
 Command the children of Israel that they bring thee the purestoil of the olives, and beaten with a pestle: that a lamp may burnalways,
 In the tabernacle of the testimony, without the veil that hangsbefore the testimony. And Aaron and his sons shall order it, that itmay give light before the Lord until the morning. It shall be aperpetual observance throughout their successions among the children ofIsrael.
Chapter 28
 Take unto thee also Aaron thy brother with his sons, from amongthe children of Israel, that they may minister to me in the priest'soffice: Aaron, Nadab, and Abiu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
 And thou shalt make a holy vesture for Aaron, thy brother, forglory and for beauty.
 And thou shalt speak to all the wise of heart, whom I have filledwith the spirit of wisdom, that they may make Aaron's vestments, inwhich he being consecrated, may minister to me.
 And these shall be the vestments that they shall make: A rationaland an ephod, a tunic and a strait linen garment, a mitre and a girdle.They shall make the holy vestments for thy brother Aaron and his sons,that they may do the office of priesthood unto me.
 And they shall take gold, and violet, and purple, and scarlettwice dyed, and fine linen.
 And they shall make the ephod of gold, and violet, and purple,and scarlet twice dyed, and fine twisted linen, embroidered with diverscolours.
 It shall have the two edges joined in the top on both sides, thatthey may be closed together.
 The very workmanship also, and all the variety of the work, shallbe of gold, and violet, and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and finetwisted linen.
 And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and shalt grave on them thenames of the children of Israel:
 Six names on one stone, and the other six on the other,according to the order of their birth.
 With the work of an engraver, and the graving of a jeweller,thou shalt engrave them with the names of the children of Israel, setin gold and compassed about:
 And thou shalt put them in both sides of the ephod, a memorialfor the children of Israel. And Aaron shall bear their names before theLord upon both shoulders, for a remembrance.
 Thou shalt make also hooks of gold.
 And two little chains of the purest gold, linked one to another,which thou shalt put into the hooks.
 And thou shalt make the rational of judgment with embroideredwork of divers colours, according to the workmanship of the ephod, ofgold, violet, and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine twistedlinen.
 It shall be four square and doubled: it shall be the measure ofa span both in length and in breadth.
 And thou shalt set in it four rows of stones . In the first rowshall be a sardius stone, and a topaz, and an emerald:
 In the second a carbuncle, a sapphire, and a jasper:
 In the third a ligurius, an agate, and an amethyst:
 In the fourth a chrysolite, an onyx, and a beryl. They shall beset in gold by their rows.
 And they shall have the names of the children of Israel: withtwelve names shall they be engraved, each stone with the name of oneaccording to the twelve tribes.
 And thou shalt make on the rational chains, linked one toanother, of the purest gold:
 And two rings of gold, which thou shalt put in the two ends atthe top of the rational.
 And the golden chains thou shalt join to the rings, that are inthe ends thereof.
 And the ends of the chains themselves, thou shalt join togetherwith two hooks, on both sides of the ephod, which is towards therational.
 Thou shalt make also two rings of gold, which thou shalt put inthe top parts of the rational, in the borders that are over against theephod, and look towards the back parts thereof.
 Moreover also other two rings of gold, which are to be set oneach side of the ephod beneath, that looketh towards the netherjoining, that the rational may be fitted with the ephod,
 And may be fastened by the rings thereof unto the rings of theephod with a violet fillet, that the joining artificially wrought maycontinue, and the rational and the ephod may not be loosed one from theother.
 And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in therational of judgment upon his breast, when he shall enter into thesanctuary, a memorial before the Lord for ever.
 And thou shalt put in the rational of judgment doctrine andtruth, which shall be on Aaron's breast, when he shall go in before theLord: and he shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel on hisbreast, in the sight of the Lord always.
 And thou shalt make the tunic of the ephod all of violet,
 In the midst whereof above shall be a hole for the head, and aborder round about it woven, as is wont to be made in the outmost partsof garments, that it may not easily be broken.
 And beneath at the feet of the same tunic, round about, thoushalt make as it were pomegranates, of violet, and purple, and scarlettwice dyed, with little bells set between:
 So that there shall be a golden bell and a pomegranate, andagain another golden bell and a pomegranate.
 And Aaron shall be vested with it in the office of his ministry,that the sound may be heard, when he goeth in and cometh out of thesanctuary, in the sight of the Lord, and that he may not die.
 Thou shalt make also a plate of the purest gold: wherein thoushalt grave with engraver's work, Holy to the Lord.
 And thou shalt tie it with a violet fillet, and it shall be uponthe mitre,
 Hanging over the forehead of the high priest. And Aaron shallbear the iniquities of those things, which the children of Israel haveoffered and sanctified, in all their gifts and offerings. And the plateshall be always on his forehead, that the Lord may be well pleased withthem.
 And thou shalt gird the tunic with fine linen, and thou shaltmake a fine linen mitre, and a girdle of embroidered work.
 Moreover, for the sons of Aaron thou shalt prepare linen tunics,and girdles and mitres for glory and beauty:
 And with all these things thou shalt vest Aaron thy brother, andhis sons with him. And thou shalt consecrate the hands of them all, andshalt sanctify them, that they may do the office of priesthood unto me.
 Thou shalt make also linen breeches, to cover the flesh of theirnakedness, from the reins to the thighs:
 And Aaron and his sons shall use them when they shall go intothe tabernacle of the testimony, or when they approach to the altar tominister in the sanctuary. lest being guilty of iniquity they die. Itshall be a law for ever to Aaron, and to his seed after him.
Chapter 29
 And thou shalt also do this, that they may be consecrated to mein priesthood. Take a calf from the herd, and two rams without blemish,
 And unleavened bread, and a cake without leaven, tempered withoil, wafers also unleavened, anointed with oil: thou shalt make themall of wheaten flour.
 And thou shalt put them in a basket, and offer them: and the calfand the two rams.
 And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons to the door of thetabernacle of the testimony. And when thou hast washed the father andhis sons with water,
 Thou shalt clothe Aaron with his vestments, that is, with thelinen garment and the tunic, and the ephod and the rational, which thoushalt gird with the girdle.
 And thou shalt put the mitre upon his head, and the holy plateupon the mitre,
 And thou shalt pour the oil of unction upon his head: and by thisrite shall he be consecrated.
 Thou shalt bring his sons also, and shalt put on them the linentunics, and gird them with a girdle:
 To wit, Aaron and his children, and thou shalt put mitres uponthem; and they shall be priests to me by a perpetual ordinance. Afterthou shalt have consecrated their hands,
 Thou shalt present also the calf before the tabernacle of thetestimony. And Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon his head,
 And thou shalt kill him in the sight of the Lord, beside thedoor of the tabernacle of the testimony.
 And taking some of the blood of the calf, thou shalt put it uponthe horns of the altar with thy finger, and the rest of the blood thoushalt pour at the bottom thereof.
 Thou shalt take also all the fat that covereth the entrails, andthe caul of the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is uponthem, and shalt offer a burn offering upon the altar:
 But the flesh of the calf, and the hide and the dung, thou shaltburn abroad, without the camp, because it is for sin.
 Thou shalt take also one ram, upon the head whereof Aaron andhis sons shall lay their hands.
 And when thou hast killed him, thou shalt take of the bloodthereof, and pour round about the altar.
 And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and having washed hisentrails and feet, thou shalt put them upon the flesh that is cut inpieces, and upon his head.
 And thou shalt offer the whole ram for a burnt offering upon thealtar: it is an oblation to the Lord, a most sweet savour of the victimof the Lord.
 Thou shalt take also the other ram, upon whose head Aaron andhis sons shall lay their hands.
 And when thou hast sacrificed him, thou shalt take of his blood,and put upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron and of his sons, andupon the thumbs and great toes of their right hand and foot, and thoushalt pour the blood upon the altar round about.
 And when thou hast taken of the blood that is upon the altar,and of the oil of unction, thou shalt sprinkle Aaron and his vesture,his sons and their vestments. And after they and their vestments areconsecrated,
 Thou shalt take the fat of the ram, and the rump, and the fatthat covereth the lungs, and the caul of the liver, and the twokidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder, becauseit is the ram of consecration:
 And one roll of bread, a cake tempered with oil, a wafer out ofthe basket of unleavened bread, which is set in the sight of the Lord:
 And thou shalt put all upon the hands of Aaron and of his sons,and shalt sanctify them elevating before the Lord.
 And thou shalt take all from their hands; and shalt burn themupon the altar for a holocaust, a most sweet savour in the sight of theLord, because it is his oblation.
 Thou shalt take also the breast of the ram, wherewith Aaron wasconsecrated, and elevating it thou shalt sanctify it before the Lord,and it shall fall to thy share.
 And thou shalt sanctify both the consecrated breast, and theshoulder that thou didst separate of the ram,
 Wherewith Aaron was consecrated and his sons, and they shallfall to Aaron's share, and his sons', by a perpetual right from thechildren of Israel: because they are the choicest and the beginnings oftheir peace victims which they offer to the Lord.
 And the holy vesture, which Aaron shall use, his sons shall haveafter him, that they may be anointed, and their hands consecrated init.
 He of his sons that shall be appointed high priest in his stead,and that shall enter into the tabernacle of the testimony to ministerin the sanctuary, shall wear it seven days.
 And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and shalt boilthe flesh thereof in the holy place:
 And Aaron and his sons shall eat it. The loaves also, that arein the basket, they shall eat in the entry of the tabernacle of thetestimony,
 That it may be an atoning sacrifice, and the hands of theofferers may be sanctified. A stranger shall not eat of them, becausethey are holy.
 And if there remain of the consecrated flesh, or of the bread,till the morning, thou shalt burn the remainder with fire: they shallnot be eaten, because they are sanctified.
 All that I have commanded thee, thou shalt do unto Aaron and hissons. Seven days shalt thou consecrate their hands:
 And thou shalt offer a calf for sin every day for expiation. Andthou shalt cleanse the altar when thou hast offered the victim ofexpiation, and shalt anoint it to sanctify it.
 Seven days shalt thou expiate the altar and sanctify it, and itshall be most holy. Every one, that shall touch it, shall be holy.
 This is what thou shalt sacrifice upon the altar: Two lambs of ayear old every day continually,
 One lamb in the morning, and another in the evening.
 With one lamb a tenth part of flour tempered with beaten oil, ofthe fourth part of a hin, and wine for libation of the same measure.
 And the other lamb thou shalt offer in the evening, according tothe rite of the morning oblation, and according to what we have said,for a savour of sweetness:
 It is a sacrifice to the Lord, by perpetual oblation unto yourgenerations, at the door of the tabernacle of the testimony before theLord, where I will appoint to speak unto thee.
 And there will I command the children of Israel, and the altarshall be sanctified by my glory.
 I will sanctify also the tabernacle of the testimony with thealtar, and Aaron with his sons, to do the office of priesthood unto me.
 And I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel, andwill be their God:
 And they shall know that I am the Lord their God, who havebrought them out of the land of Egypt, that I might abide among them, Ithe Lord their God.
Chapter 30
 Thou shalt make also an altar to burn incense, of setim wood.
8, and 8.4.
 It shall be a cubit in length, and another in breadth, that is,four square, and two in height. Horns shall go out of the same.
 And thou shalt overlay it with the purest gold, as well the gratethereof, as the walls round about, and the horns. And thou shalt maketo it a crown of gold round about,
 And two golden rings under the crown on either side, that thebars may be put into them, and the altar be carried.
 And thou shalt make the bars also of setim wood, and shaltoverlay them with gold.
 And thou shalt set the altar over against the veil, that hangethbefore the ark of the testimony before the propitiatory wherewith thetestimony is covered, where I will speak to thee.
 And Aaron shall burn sweet smelling incense upon it in themorning. When he shall dress the lamps, he shall burn it:
 And when he shall place them in the evening, he shall burn aneverlasting incense before the Lord throughout your generations.
 You shall not offer upon it incense of another composition, noroblation, and victim, neither shall you offer libations.
 And Aaron shall pray upon the horns thereof once a year, withthe blood of that which was offered for sin; and shall make atonementupon it in your generations. It shall be most holy to the Lord.
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:
 When thou shalt take the sum of the children of Israel,according to their number, every one of them shall give a price fortheir souls to the Lord, and there shall be no scourge among them, whenthey shall be reckoned.
 And this shall every one give that passeth at the naming, half asicle according to the standard of the temple. A sicle hath twentyobols. Half a sicle shall be offered to the Lord.
 He that is counted in the number from twenty years and upwards,shall give the price.
 The rich man shall not add to half a sicle, and the poor manshall diminish nothing.
 And the money received, which was contributed by the children ofIsrael, thou shalt deliver unto the uses of the tabernacle of thetestimony, that it may be a memorial of them before the Lord, and hemay be merciful to their souls.
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:
 Thou shalt make also a brazen laver with its foot to wash in:and thou shalt set it between the tabernacle of the testimony and thealtar. And water being put into it:
 Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and feet in it:
 When they are going into the tabernacle of the testimony, andwhen they are to come to the altar, to offer on it incense to the Lord,
 Lest perhaps they die. It shall be an everlasting law to him,and to his seed by successions.
 And the Lord spoke to Moses,
 Saying: Take spices, of principal and chosen myrrh five hundredsicles, and of cinnamon half so much; that is, two hundred and fiftysicles, of calamus in like manner two hundred and fifty,
 And of cassia five hundred sicles by the weight of thesanctuary, of oil of olives the measure hin:
 And thou shalt make the holy oil of unction, an ointmentcompounded after the art of the perfumer,
 And therewith thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the testimony,and the ark of the testament,
 And the table with the vessels thereof, the candlestick andfurniture thereof, the altars of incense,
 And of holocaust, and all the furniture that belongeth to theservice of them.
 And thou shalt sanctify all, and they shall be most holy: hethat shall touch them shall be sanctified.
 Thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and shalt sanctify them,that they may do the office of priesthood unto me.
 And thou shalt say to the children of Israel: This oil ofunction shall be holy unto me throughout your generations.
 The flesh of man shall not be anointed therewith, and you shallmake none other of the same composition, because it is sanctified, andshall be holy unto you.
 What man soever shall compound such, and shall give thereof to astranger, he shall be cut off from his people.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Take unto thee spices, stacte, andonycha, galbanum of sweet savour, and the clearest frankincense, allshall be of equal weight.
 And thou shalt make incense compounded by the work of theperfumer, well tempered together, and pure, and most worthy ofsanctification.
 And when thou hast beaten all into very small powder, thou shaltset of it before the tabernacle of the testimony, in the place where Iwill appear to thee. Most holy shall this incense be unto you.
 You shall not make such a composition for your own uses, becauseit is holy to the Lord.
 What man soever shall make the like, to enjoy the smell thereof,he shall perish out of his people.
Chapter 31
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:
 Behold, I have called by name Beseleel the son of Uri, the son ofHur, of the tribe of Juda,
 And I have filled him with the spirit of God, with wisdom andunderstanding, and knowledge in all manner of work,
 To devise whatsoever may be artificially made of gold, andsilver, and brass,
 Of marble, and precious stones, and variety of wood.
 And I have given him for his companion Ooliab, the son ofAchisamech, of the tribe of Dan. And I have put wisdom in the heart ofevery skilful man, that they may make all things which I have commandedthee,
 The tabernacle of the covenant, and the ark of the testimony, andthe propitiatory, that is over it, and all the vessels of thetabernacle,
 And the table and the vessels thereof, the most pure candlestickwith the vessels thereof, and the altars of incense,
 And of holocaust, and all their vessels, the laver with its foot,
 The holy vestments in the ministry for Aaron the priest, and forhis sons, that they may execute their office, about the sacred things:
 The oil of unction, and the incense of spices in the sanctuary,all things which I have commanded thee, shall they make.
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:
 Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them: Seethat you keep my sabbath; because it is a sign between me and you inyour generations that you may know that I am the Lord, who sanctifyyou.
 keep you my sabbath: for it is holy unto you: he that shallprofane it, shall be put to death: he that shall do any work in it, hissoul shall perish out of the midst of his people.
 Six days shall you do work: in the seventh day is the sabbath,the rest holy to the Lord. Every one that shall do any work on thisday, shall die.
 Let the children of Israel keep the sabbath, and celebrate it intheir generations. It is an everlasting covenant
 Between me and the children of Israel, and a perpetual sign. Forin six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and in the seventh heceased from work.
 And the Lord, when he had ended these words in Mount Sinai, gaveto Moses two stone tables of testimony, written with the finger of God.
Chapter 32
 And the people seeing that Moses delayed to come down from themount, gathering together against Aaron, said: Arise, make us gods,that may go before us: For as to this Moses, the man that brought usout of the land of Egypt, we know not what has befallen him.
 And Aaron said to them: Take the golden earrings from the ears ofyour wives, and your sons and daughters, and bring them to me.
 And the people did what he had commanded, bringing the earringsto Aaron.
 And when he had received them, he fashioned them by founders'work, and made of them a molten calf. And they said: These are thygods, O Israel, that have brought thee out of the land of Egypt.
 And when Aaron saw this, he built an altar before it, and madeproclamation by a crier's voice, saying To morrow is the solemnity ofthe Lord.
 And rising in the morning, they offered holocausts, and peacevictims, and the people sat down to eat and drink, and they rose up toplay.
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Go, get thee down: thypeople, which thou hast brought out of the land of Egypt, hath sinned.
 They have quickly strayed from the way which thou didst shewthem: and they have made to themselves a molten calf, and have adoredit, and sacrificing victims to it, have said: These are thy gods, OIsrael, that have brought thee out of the land of Egypt.
 And again the Lord said to Moses: I see that this people isstiffnecked:
 Let me alone, that my wrath may be kindled against them, andthat I may destroy them, and I will make of thee a great nation.
 But Moses besought the Lord his God, saying: Why, O Lord, is thyindignation enkindled against thy people, whom thou hast brought out ofthe land of Egypt, with great power, and with a mighty hand?
 Let not the Egyptians say, I beseech thee: He craftily broughtthem out, that he might kill them in the mountains, and destroy themfrom the earth: let thy anger cease, and be appeased upon thewickedness of thy people.
 Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thousworest by thy own self, saying: I will multiply your seed as the starsof heaven: and this whole land that I have spoken of, I will give toyour seed, and you shall possess it for ever:
 And the Lord was appeased from doing the evil which he hadspoken against his people.
 And Moses returned from the mount, carrying the two tables ofthe testimony in his hand, written on both sides,
 And made by the work of God; the writing also of God was gravenin the tables.
 And Josue hearing the noise of the people shouting, said toMoses: The noise of battle is heard in the camp.
 But he answered: It is not the cry of men encouraging to fight,nor the shout of men compelling to flee: but I hear the voice ofsingers.
 And when he came nigh to the camp, he saw the calf, and thedances: and being very angry, he threw the tables out of his hand, andbroke them at the foot of the mount:
 And laying hold of the calf which they had made, he burnt it,and beat it to powder, which he strewed into water, and gave thereof tothe children of Israel to drink.
 And he said to Aaron: What has this people done to thee, thatthou shouldst bring upon them a most heinous sin?
 And he answered him: Let not my lord be offended; for thouknowest this people, that they are prone to evil.
 They said to me: make us gods, that may go before us; for as tothis Moses, who brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, we know notwhat is befallen him.
 And I said to them: Which of you hath any gold? and they tookand brought it to me; and I cast it into the fire, and this calf cameout.
 And when Moses saw that the people were naked, (for Aaron hadstripped them by occasion of the shame of the filth, and had set themnaked among their enemies)
 Then standing in the gate of the camp, he said: If any man be onthe Lord's side, let him join with me. And all the sons of Levigathered themselves together unto him:
 And he said to them: Thus saith the Lord God of Israel: Putevery man his sword upon his thigh: go, and return from gate to gatethrough the midst of the camp, and let every man kill his brother, andfriend, and neighbour.
 And the sons of Levi did according to the words of Moses, andthere were slain that day about three and twenty thousand men.
 And Moses said: You have consecrated your hands this day to theLord, every man in his son and in his brother, that a blessing may begiven to you.
 And when the next day was come, Moses spoke to the people: Youhave sinned a very great sin: I will go up to the Lord, if by any meansI may be able to entreat him for your crime.
 And returning to the Lord, he said: I beseech thee: this peoplehath sinned a heinous sin, and they have made to themselves gods ofgold: either forgive them this trespass,
 Or if thou do not, strike me out of the book that thou hastwritten.
 And the Lord answered him: He that hath sinned against me, himwill I strike out of my book:
 But go thou, and lead this people whither I have told thee: myangel shall go before thee. And I in the day of revenge will visit thissin also of theirs.
 The Lord therefore struck the people for the guilt, on occasionof the calf which Aaron had made.
Chapter 33
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Go, get thee up from thisplace, thou and thy people which thou hast brought out of the land ofEgypt, into the land concerning which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, andJacob, saying: To thy seed I will give it:
 And I will send an angel before thee, that I may cast out theChanaanite, and the Amorrhite, and the Hethite, and the Pherezite, andthe Hevite, and the Jebusite,
 That thou mayst enter into the land that floweth with milk andhoney. For I will not go up with thee, because thou art a stiffneckedpeople; lest I destroy thee in the way.
 And the people hearing these very bad tidings, mourned: and noman put on his ornaments according to custom.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Say to the children of Israel: Thouart a stiffnecked people, once I shall come up in the midst of thee,and shall destroy thee. Now presently lay aside thy ornaments, that Imay know what to do to thee.
 So the children of Israel laid aside their ornaments by MountHoreb.
 Moses also taking the tabernacle, pitched it without the campafar off, and called the name thereof, The tabernacle of the covenant.And all the people, that had any question, went forth to the tabernacleof the covenant, without the camp.
 And when Moses went forth to the tabernacle, all the people roseup, and every one stood in the door of his pavilion, and they beheldthe back of Moses, till he went into the tabernacle.
 And when he was gone into the tabernacle of the covenant, thepillar of the cloud came down, and stood at the door, and he spoke withMoses.
 And all saw that the pillar of the cloud stood at the door ofthe tabernacle. And they stood and worshipped at the doors of theirtent.
 And the Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as a man is wont tospeak to his friend. And when he returned into the camp, his servantJosue, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not from the tabernacle.
 And Moses said to the Lord: Thou commandest me to lead forththis people; and thou dost not let me know whom thou wilt send with me,especially whereas thou hast said: I know thee by name, and thou hastfound favour in my sight.
 If therefore I have found favour in thy sight, shew me thy face,that I may know thee, and may find grace before thy eyes: look upon thypeople this nation.
 And the Lord said: My face shall go before thee, and I will givethee rest.
 And Moses said: If thou thyself dost not go before, bring us notout of this place.
 For how shall we be able to know, I and thy people, that we havefound grace in thy sight, unless thou walk with us, that we may beglorified by all people that dwell upon the earth?
 And the Lord said to Moses: This word also, which thou hastspoken, will I do; for thou hast found grace before me, and thee I haveknown by name.
 And he said: Shew me thy glory.
 He answered: I will shew thee all good, and I will proclaim inthe name of the Lord before thee: and I will have mercy on whom I will,and I will be merciful to whom it shall please me.
 And again he said: Thou canst not see my face: for man shall notsee me, and live.
 And again he said: Behold there is a place with me, and thoushalt stand upon the rock.
 And when my glory shall pass, I will set thee in a hole of therock, and protect thee with my righthand till I pass:
 And I will take away my hand, and thou shalt see my back parts:but my face thou canst not see.
Chapter 34
 And after this he said: Hew thee two tables of stone like untothe former, and I will write upon them the words, which were in thetables, which thou brokest.
 Be ready in the morning, that thou mayst forthwith go up intoMount Sinai, and thou shalt stand with me upon the top of the mount.
 Let no man go up with thee, and let not any man be seenthroughout all the mount; neither let the oxen nor the sheep feed overagainst it.
 Then he cut out two tables of stone, such as had been before; andrising very early he went up into the Mount Sinai, as the Lord hadcommanded him, carrying with him the tables.
 And when the Lord was come down in a cloud, Moses stood with him,calling upon the name of the Lord.
 And when he passed before him, he said: O the Lord, the Lord God,merciful and gracious, patient and of much compassion, and true,
 Who keepest mercy unto thousands: who takest away iniquity, andwickedness, and sin, and no man of himself is innocent before thee. Whorenderest the iniquity of the fathers to the children, and to thegrandchildren unto the third and fourth generation.
 And Moses making haste, bowed down prostrate unto the earth, andadoring,
 Said: If I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, I beseech theethat thou wilt go with us, (for it is a stiffnecked people) and takeaway our iniquities and sin, and possess us.
 The Lord answered: I will make a covenant in the sight of all, Iwill do signs such as were never seen upon the earth, nor in anynations; that this people, in the midst of whom thou art, may see theterrible work of the Lord which I will do.
 Observe all things which this day I command thee: I myself willdrive out before thy face the Amorrhite, and the Chanaanite, and theHethite, and the Pherezite, and the Hevite, and the Jebusite.
 Beware thou never join in friendship with the inhabitants ofthat land, which may be thy ruin:
 But destroy their altars, break their statues and cut down theirgroves:
 Adore not any strange god. The Lord his name is jealous, he is ajealous God.
 Make no covenant with the men of those countries; lest, whenthey have committed fornication with their gods, and have adored theiridols, some one call thee to eat of the things sacrificed.
 Neither shalt thou take of their daughters a wife for thy son,lest after they themselves have committed fornication, they make thysons also to commit fornication with their gods.
 Thou shalt not make to thyself any molten gods.
 Seven daysshalt thou eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee in the time of themonth of the new corn: for in the month of the spring time thou camestout from Egypt.
 All of the male kind that openeth the womb, shall be mine. Ofall beasts; both of oxen and of sheep, it shall be mine.
 The firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a sheep: but ifthou wilt not give a price for it, it shall be slain. The firstborn ofthy sons thou shalt redeem: neither shalt thou appear before me empty.
 Six days shalt thou work, the seventh day thou shalt cease toplough and to reap.
 Thou shalt keep the feast of weeks with the firstfruits of thecorn of thy wheat harvest, and the feast when the time of the yearreturneth that all things are laid in.
 Three times in the year all thy males shall appear in the sightof the almighty Lord the God of Israel.
 For when I shall have taken away the nations from thy face, andshall have enlarged thy borders, no man shall lie in wait against thyland when thou shalt go up, and appear in the sight of the Lord thy Godthrice in a year.
 Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice upon leaven;neither shall there remain in the morning any thing of the victim ofthe solemnity of the Phase.
 The first of the fruits of thy ground thou shalt offer in thehouse of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not boil a kid in the milk of hisdam.
 And the Lord said to Moses: Write thee these words, by which Ihave made a covenant both with thee and with Israel.
 And he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights: heneither ate bread nor drank water, and he wrote upon the tables the tenwords of the covenant.
 And when Moses came down from the Mount Sinai, he held the twotables of the testimony, and he knew not that his face was horned fromthe conversation of the Lord.
 And Aaron and the children of Israel seeing the face of Moseshorned, were afraid to come near.
 And being called by him, they returned, both Aaron and therulers of the congregation. And after that he spoke to them,
 And all the children of Israel came to him: and he gave them incommandment all that he had heard of the Lord on Mount Sinai.
 And having done speaking, he put a veil upon his face.
 But when he went in to the Lord, and spoke with him, he took itaway until he came forth, and then he spoke to the children of Israelall things that had been commanded him.
 And they saw that the face of Moses when he came out was horned,but he covered his face again, if at any time he spoke to them.
Chapter 35
 And all the multitude of the children of Israel being gatheredtogether, he said to them: These are the things which the Lord hathcommanded to be done:
 Six days you shall do work; the seventh day shall be holy untoyou, the sabbath and the rest of the Lord: he that shall do any work onit, shall be put to death.
 You shall kindle no fire in any of your habitations on thesabbath day.
 And Moses said to all the assembly of the children of Israel:This is the word the Lord hath commanded, saying:
 Set aside with you firstfruits to the Lord. Let every one that iswilling and hath a ready heart, offer them to the Lord: gold, andsilver, and brass,
 Violet and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine linen, goats'hair,
 And rams' skins dyed red, and violet coloured skins, setim wood,
 And oil to maintain lights, and to make ointment, and most sweetincense,
 Onyx stones, and precious stones, for the adorning of the ephodand the rational.
 Whosoever of you is wise, let him come, and make that which theLord hath commanded:
 To wit, the tabernacle, and the roof thereof, and the cover, therings, and the board-work with the bars, the pillars and the sockets:
 The ark and the staves, the propitiatory, and the veil that isdrawn before it:
 The table with the bars and the vessels, and the loaves ofproposition:
 The candlestick to bear up the lights, the vessels thereof andthe lamps, and the oil for the nourishing of fires:
 The altar of incense, and the bars, and the oil of unction, andthe incense of spices: the hanging at the door of the tabernacle:
 The altar of holocaust, and its grate of brass, with the barsand vessels thereof: the laver and its foot:
 The curtains of the court, with the pillars and the sockets, thehanging in the doors of the entry.
 The pins of the tabernacle, and of the court, with their littlecords:
 The vestments that are to be used in the ministry of thesanctuary, the vesture of Aaron the high priest, and of his sons, to dothe office of priesthood to me.
 And all the multitude of the children of Israel going out fromthe presence of Moses,
 Offered firstfruits to the Lord with a most ready and devoutmind, to make the work of the tabernacle of the testimony. Whatever wasnecessary to the service and to the holy vestments,
 Both men and women gave bracelets and earrings, rings andtablets: every vessel of gold was set aside to be offered to the Lord.
 If any man had violet, and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, finelinen and goats' hair, ramskins dyed red, and violet coloured skins,
 Metal of silver and brass, they offered it to the Lord, andsetim wood for divers uses.
 The skilful women also gave such things as they had spun,violet, purple, and scarlet, and fine linen,
 And goats' hair, giving all of their own accord.
 But the princes offered onyx stones, and precious stones, forthe ephod and the rational,
 And spices and oil for the lights, and for the preparing ofointment, and to make the incense of most sweet savour.
 All, both men and women, with devout mind offered gifts, thatthe works might be done which the Lord had commanded by the hand ofMoses. All the children of Israel dedicated voluntary offerings to theLord.
 And Moses said to the children of Israel: Behold, the Lord hathcalled by name Beseleel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribeof Juda,
 And hath filled him with the spirit of God, with wisdom andunderstanding, and knowledge, and all learning,
 To devise and to work in gold and silver and brass,
 And in engraving stones, and in carpenters' work. Whatsoever canbe devised artificially,
 He hath given in his heart: Ooliab also, the son of Achisamech,of the tribe of Dan:
 Both of them hath he instructed with wisdom, to do carpenters'work, and tapestry, and embroidery in blue and purple, and scarlettwice dyed, and fine linen, and to weave all things, and to invent allnew things.
Chapter 36
 Beseleel therefore, and Ooliab, and every wise man, to whom theLord gave wisdom and understanding, to know how to work artificially,made the things that are necessary for the uses of the sanctuary, andwhich the Lord commanded.
 And when Moses had called them, and every skilful man, to whomthe Lord had given wisdom, and such as of their own accord had offeredthemselves to the making of the work,
 He delivered all the offerings of the children of Israel untothem. And while they were earnest about the work, the people daily inthe morning offered their vows.
 Whereupon the workmen being constrained to come,
 Said to Moses: The people offereth more than is necessary.
 Moses therefore commanded proclamation to be made by the crier'svoice: Let neither man nor woman offer any more for the work of thesanctuary. And so they ceased from offering gifts,
 Because the things that were offered did suffice, and were toomuch.
 And all the men that were wise of heart, to accomplish the workof the tabernacle, made ten curtains of twisted fine linen, and violet,and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, with varied work, and the art ofembroidering:
 The length of one curtain was twenty-eight cubits, and thebreadth four: all the curtains were of the same size.
 And he joined five curtains, one to another, and the other fivehe coupled one to another.
 He made also loops of violet in the edge of one curtain on bothsides, and in the edge of the other curtain in like manner,
 That the loops might meet one against another, and might bejoined each with the other.
 Whereupon also he cast fifty rings of gold, that might catch theloops of the curtains, and they might be made one tabernacle.
 He made also eleven curtains of goats' hair, to cover the roofof the tabernacle:
 One curtain was thirty cubits long, and four cubits broad: allthe curtains were of one measure.
 Five of which he joined apart, and the other six apart.
 And he made fifty loops in the edge of one curtain, and fifty inthe edge of another curtain, that they might be joined one to another.
 And fifty buckles of brass wherewith the roof might be knittogether, that of all the curtains there might be made one covering.
 He made also a cover for the tabernacle of rams' skins dyed red;and another cover over that of violet skins.
 He made also the boards of the tabernacle of setim woodstanding.
 The length of one board was ten cubits; and the breadth was onecubit and a half.
 There were two mortises throughout every board, that one mightbe joined to the other. And in this manner he made for all the boardsof the tabernacle.
 Of which twenty were at the south side southward,
 With forty sockets of silver, two sockets were put under oneboard on the two sides of the corners, where the mortises of the sidesend in the corners.
 At that side also of the tabernacle, that looketh towards thenorth, he made twenty boards,
 With forty sockets of silver, two sockets for every board.
 But against the west, to wit, at that side of the tabernacle,which looketh to the sea, he made six boards,
 And two others at each corner of the tabernacle behind:
 Which were also joined from beneath unto the top, and wenttogether into one joint. Thus he did on both sides at the corners:
 So there were in all eight boards, and they had sixteen socketsof silver, to wit, two sockets under every board.
 He made also bars of setim wood, five to hold together theboards of one side of the tabernacle,
 And five others to join together the boards of the other side;and besides these, five other bars at the west side of the tabernacletowards the sea.
 He made also another bar, that might come by the midst of theboards from corner to corner.
 And the boards themselves he overlaid with gold casting for themsockets of silver. And their rings he made of gold, through which thebars might be drawn: and he covered the bars themselves with plates ofgold.
 He made also a veil of violet, and purple, scarlet and finetwisted linen, varied and distinguished with embroidery:
 And four pillars of setim wood, which with their heads heoverlaid with gold, casting for them sockets of silver.
 He made also a hanging in the entry of the tabernacle of violet,purple, scarlet, and fine twisted linen, with the work of anembroiderer.
 And five pillars with their heads, which he covered with gold,and their sockets he cast of brass.
Chapter 37
 And Beseleel made also, the ark of setim wood: it was two cubitsand a half in length, and a cubit and a half in breadth, and the heightwas of one cubit and a half: and he overlaid it with the purest goldwithin and without.
 And he made to it a crown of gold round about,
 Casting four rings of gold at the four corners thereof: two ringsin one side, and two in the other.
 And he made bars of setim wood, which he overlaid with gold,
 And he put them into the rings that were at the sides of the arkto carry it.
 He made also the propitiatory, that is, the oracle, of the purestgold, two cubits and a half in length, and a cubit and a half inbreadth.
 Two cherubims also of beaten gold, which he set on the two sidesof the propitiatory:
 One cherub in the top of one side, and the other cherub in thetop of the other side: two cherubims at the two ends of thepropitiatory,
 Spreading their wings, and covering the propitiatory, and lookingone towards the other, and towards it.
 He made also the table of setim wood, in length two cubits, andin breadth one cubit, and in height it was a cubit and a half.
 And he overlaid it with the finest gold, and he made to it agolden ledge round about,
 And to the ledge itself he made a polished crown of gold, offour fingers breadth, and upon the same another golden crown.
 And he cast four rings of gold, which he put in the four cornersat each foot of the table,
 Over against the crown: and he put the bars into them, that thetable might be carried.
 The bars also themselves he made of setim wood, and overlaidthem with gold.
 And the vessels for the divers uses of the table, dishes, bowls,and cups, and censers of pure gold, wherein the libations are to beoffered.
 He made also the candlestick of beaten work of the finest gold.from the shaft whereof its branches, its cups, and bowls, and liliescame out:
 Six on the two sides: three branches on one side, and three onthe other.
 Three cups in manner of a nut on each branch, and bowls withaland lilies: and three cups of the fashion of a nut in another branch,and bowls withal and lilies. The work of the six branches, that wentout from the shaft of the candlestick was equal.
 And in the shaft itself were four cups after the manner of anut, and bowls withal at every one, and lilies:
 And bowls under two branches in three places, which togethermade six branches going out from one shaft.
 So both the bowls, and the branches were of the same, all beatenwork of the purest gold.
 He made also the seven lamps with their snuffers, and thevessels where the snuffings were to be put out, of the purest gold.
 The candlestick with all the vessels thereof weighed a talent ofgold.
 He made also the alter of incense of setim wood, being a cubiton every side foursquare, and in height two cubits: from the corners ofwhich went out horns.
 And he overlaid it with the purest gold, with its grate, and thesides, and the horns.
 And he made to it a crown of gold round about, and two goldenrings under the crown at each side, that the bars might be put intothem, and the altar be carried.
 And the bars themselves he made also of setim wood, and overlaidthem with plates of gold.
 He compounded also the oil for the ointment of sanctification,and incense of the purest spices, according to the work of a perfumer.
Chapter 38
 He made also the altar of holocaust of setim wood, five cubitssquare, and three in height:
 The horns whereof went out from the corners, and he overlaid itwith plates of brass.
 And for the uses thereof, he prepared divers vessels of brass,cauldrons, tongs, fleshhooks, pothooks and firepans.
 And he made the grate thereof of brass, in manner of a net, andunder it in the midst of the altar a hearth,
 Casting four rings at the four ends of the net at the top, to putin bars to carry it:
 And he made the bars of setim wood, and overlaid them with platesof brass:
 And he drew them through the rings that stood out in the sides ofthe altar. And the altar itself was not solid, but hollow, of boards,and empty within.
 He made also the laver of brass, with the foot thereof, of themirrors of the women that watched at the door of the tabernacle.
 He made also the court, in the south side whereof were hangingsof fine twisted linen of a hundred cubits.
 Twenty pillars of brass with their sockets, the beads of thepillars, and the whole graving of the work, of silver.
 In like manner at the north side the hangings, the pillars, andthe sockets and heads of the pillars were of the same measure, and workand metal.
 But on that side that looketh to the west, there were hangingsof fifty cubits, ten pillars of brass with their sockets, and the headsof the pillars, and all the graving of the work, of silver.
 Moreover, towards the east he prepared hangings of fifty cubits:
 Fifteen cubits of which, were on one side with three pillars,and their sockets:
 And on the other side (for between the two he made the entry ofthe tabernacle) there were hangings equally of fifteen cubits, andthree pillars, and as many sockets.
 All the hangings of the court were woven with twisted linen.
 The sockets of the pillars were of brass, and their heads withall their gravings of silver: and he overlaid the pillars of the courtalso with silver.
 And he made in the entry thereof an embroidered hanging ofviolet, purple, scarlet, and fine twisted linen, that was twenty cubitslong, and five cubits high, according to the measure of all thehangings of the court.
 And the pillars in the entry were four, with sockets of brass,and their heads and gravings of silver.
 The pins also of the tabernacle and of the court round about hemade of brass.
 These are the instruments of the tabernacle of the testimony,which were counted according to the commandment of Moses, in theceremonies of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, son of Aaron thepriest:
 Which Beseleel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur of the tribe ofJuda, had made, as the Lord commanded by Moses.
 Having for his companion Ooliab, the son of Achisamech, of thetribe of Dan: who also was an excellent artificer in wood, and workerin tapestry and embroidery in violet, purple, scarlet, and fine linen.
 All the gold that was spent in the work of the sanctuary, andthat was offered in gifts, was nine and twenty talents, and sevenhundred and thirty sicles according to the standard of the sanctuary.
 And it was offered by them that went to be numbered, from twentyyears old and upwards, of six hundred and three thousand five hundredand fifty men able to bear arms.
 There were moreover a hundred talents of silver, whereof werecast the sockets of the sanctuary, and of the entry where the veilhangeth.
 A hundred sockets were made of a hundred talents, one talentbeing reckoned for every socket.
 And of the thousand seven hundred and seventy-five he made theheads of the pillars, which also he overlaid with silver.
 And there were offered of brass also seventy-two thousandtalents, and four hundred sicles besides,
 Of which were cast the sockets in the entry of the tabernacle ofthe testimony, and the altar of brass with the grate thereof, and alsothe vessels that belong to the use thereof.
 And the sockets of the court as well round about as in the entrythereof, and the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about.
Chapter 39
 And he made, of violet and purple, scarlet and fine linen, thevestments for Aaron to wear when he ministered in the holy places, asthe Lord commanded Moses.
 So he made an ephod of gold, violet, and purple, and scarlettwice dyed, and fine twisted linen,
 With embroidered work, and he cut thin plates of gold, and drewthem small into threads, that they might be twisted with the woof ofthe foresaid colours,
 And two borders coupled one to the other in the top on eitherside,
 And a girdle of the same colours, as the Lord had commandedMoses.
 He prepared also two onyx stones, fast set and closed in gold,and graven, by the art of a lapidary, with the names of the children ofIsrael:
 And he set them in the sides of the ephod, for a memorial of thechildren of Israel, as the Lord had commanded Moses.
 He made also a rational with embroidered work, according to thework of the ephod, of gold, violet, purple, and scarlet twice dyed, andfine twisted linen:
 Foursquare, double, of the measure of a span.
 And he set four rows of precious stones in it. In the first rowwas a sardius, a topaz, an emerald.
 In the second, a carbuncle, a sapphire, and a jasper.
 In the third, a ligurius, an agate, and an amethyst.
 In the fourth, a chrysolite, an onyx, and a beryl, set andenclosed in gold by their rows.
 And the twelve stones, were engraved with the names of thetwelve tribes of Israel, each one with its several name.
 They made also in the rational little chains, linked one toanother, of the purest gold,
 And two hooks, and as many rings of gold. And they set the ringson either side of the rational,
 On which rings the two golden chains should hang, which they putinto the hooks that stood out in the corners of the ephod.
 These both before and behind so answered one another, that theephod and the rational were bound together,
 Being fastened to the girdle, and strongly coupled with rings,which a violet fillet joined, lest they should flag loose, and be movedone from the other, as the Lord commanded Moses.
 They made also the tunic of the ephod all of violet,
 And a hole for the head in the upper part at the middle, and awoven border round about the hole:
 And beneath at the feet pomegranates of violet, purple, scarlet,and fine twisted linen:
 And little bells of the purest gold, which they put between thepomegranates at the bottom of the tunic round about:
 To wit, a bell of gold, and a pomegranate, wherewith the highpriest went adorned, when he discharged his ministry, as the Lord hadcommanded Moses.
 They made also fine linen tunics with woven work for Aaron andhis sons:
 And mitres with their little crowns of fine linen:
 And linen breeches of fine linen:
 And a girdle of fine twisted linen, violet, purple, and scarlettwice dyed, of embroidery work, as the Lord had commanded Moses.
 They made also the plate of sacred veneration of the purestgold, and they wrote on it with the engraving of a lapidary: The Holyof the Lord:
 And they fastened it to the mitre with a violet fillet, as theLord had commanded Moses.
 So all the work of the tabernacle and of the roof of thetestimony was finished: and the children of Israel did all things whichthe Lord had commanded Moses.
 And they offered the tabernacle, and the roof, and the wholefurniture, the rings, the boards, the bars, the pillars and theirsockets,
 The cover of rams' skins dyed red, and the other cover of violetskins,
 The veil, the ark, the bars, the propitiatory,
 The table, with the vessels thereof, and the loaves ofproposition:
 The candlestick, the lamps, and the furniture of them, with theoil:
 The altar of gold, and the ointment, and the incense of spices:
 And the hanging in the entry of the tabernacle:
 The altar of brass, the grate, the bars, and all the vesselsthereof: the laver, with the foot thereof: the hangings of the court,and the pillars, with their sockets:
 The hanging in the entry of the court, and the little cords, andthe pins thereof. Nothing was wanting of the vessels, that werecommanded to be made for the ministry of the tabernacle, and for theroof of the covenant.
 The vestments also, which the priests, to wit, Aaron and hissons, use in the sanctuary,
 The children of Israel offered, as the Lord had commanded.
 And when Moses saw all things finished, he blessed them.
Chapter 40
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:
 The first month, the first day of the month, thou shalt set upthe tabernacle of the testimony,
 And shalt put the ark in it, and shalt let down the veil beforeit:
 And thou shalt bring in the table, and set upon it the thingsthat are commanded according to the rite. The candlestick shall standwith its lamps,
 And the altar of gold, whereon the incee made for the ministry of the tabernacle, and for theroof of the covenant.
 The vestments also, which the priests, to wit, Aaron and hissons, use in the sanctuary,
 The children of Israel offered, as the Lord had commanded.
 And when Moses saw all things finished, he blessed them.
Chapter 40
 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:
 The first month, the first day of the month, thou shalt set upthe tabernacle of the testimony,
 And shalt put the ark in it, and shalt let down the veil beforeit:
 And thou shalt bring in the table, and set upon it the thingsthat are commanded according to the rite. The candlestick shall standwith its lamps,
 And the altar of gold, whereon the incense is burnt before theark of the testimony. Thou shalt put the hanging in the entry of thetabernacle,
 And before it the altar of holocaust.
 The laver between the altar and the tabernacle, and thou shaltfill it with water.
 And thou shalt encompass the court with hangings, and the entrythereof.
 And thou shalt take the oil of unction and anoint the tabernaclewith its vessels, that they may be sanctified:
 The altar of holocaust and all its vessels:
 The laver with its foot: thou shalt consecrate all with the oilof unction, that they may be most holy.
 And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons to the door of thetabernacle of the testimony, and having washed them with water,
 Thou shalt put on them the holy vestments, that they mayminister to me, and that the unction of them may prosper to aneverlasting priesthood.
 And Moses did all that the Lord had commanded.
 So in the first month of the second year, the first day of themonth, the tabernacle was set up.
 And Moses reared it up, and placed the boards and the socketsand the bars, and set up the pillars,
 And spread the roof over the tabernacle, putting over it acover, as the Lord had commanded.
 And he put the testimony in the ark, thrusting bars underneath,and the oracle above.
 And when he had brought the ark into the tabernacle, he drew theveil before it to fulfil the commandment of the Lord.
 And he set the table in the tabernacle of the testimony, at thenorth side, without the veil,
 Setting there in order the loaves of proposition, as the Lordhad commanded Moses.
 He set the candlestick also in the tabernacle of the testimony,over against the table on the south side,
 Placing the lamps in order, according to the precept of theLord.
 He set also the altar of gold under the roof of the testimony,over against the veil,
 And burnt upon it the incense of spices, as the Lord hadcommanded Moses.
 And he put also the hanging in the entry of the tabernacle ofthe testimony,
 And the altar of holocaust in the entry of the testimony,offering the holocaust, and the sacrifices upon it, as the Lord hadcommanded.
 And he set the laver between the tabernacle of the testimony andthe altar, filling it with water.
 And Moses and Aaron, and his sons, washed their hands and feet,
 When they went into the tabernacle of the covenant, and went tothe altar, as the Lord had commanded Moses.
 He set up also the court round about the tabernacle and thealtar, drawing the hanging in the entry thereof. After all things wereperfected,
 The cloud covered the tabernacle of the testimony, and the gloryof the Lord filled it.
 Neither could Moses go into the tabernacle of the covenant, thecloud covering all things, and the majesty of the Lord shining, for thecloud had covered all.
 If at any time the cloud removed from the tabernacle, thechildren of Israel went forward by their troops:
 If it hung over, they remained in the same place.
 For the cloud of the Lord hung over the tabernacle by day, and afire by night, in the sight of all the children of Israel throughoutall their mansions.
